FAMILY: ACCESS CONTROL CLASS: TECHNICAL
AC-1 ACCESS CONTROL POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented access control policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the access control policy
and associated access controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the access control family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The access control policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Access control procedures can be developed for
the security program in general and for a particular information system, when required. The
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the access control
policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-1 MOD AC-1 HIGH AC-1
AC-2 ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Control: The organization manages information system accounts, including:
a. Identifying account types (i.e., individual, group, system, application, guest/anonymous, and
temporary);
b. Establishing conditions for group membership;
c. Identifying authorized users of the information system and specifying access privileges;
d. Requiring appropriate approvals for requests to establish accounts;
e. Establishing, activating, modifying, disabling, and removing accounts;
f. Specifically authorizing and monitoring the use of guest/anonymous and temporary accounts;
g. Notifying account managers when temporary accounts are no longer required and when
information system users are terminated, transferred, or information system usage or need-toknow/
need-to-share changes;
h. Deactivating: (i) temporary accounts that are no longer required; and (ii) accounts of
terminated or transferred users;
i. Granting access to the system based on: (i) a valid access authorization; (ii) intended system
usage; and (iii) other attributes as required by the organization or associated missions/business
functions; and
j. Reviewing accounts [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-3


Supplemental Guidance: The identification of authorized users of the information system and the
specification of access privileges is consistent with the requirements in other security controls in
the security plan. Users requiring administrative privileges on information system accounts
receive additional scrutiny by organizational officials responsible for approving such accounts and
privileged access. Related controls: AC-3, AC-4, AC-5, AC-6, AC-10, AC-17, AC-19, AC-20,
AU-9, IA-4, IA-5, CM-5, CM-6, MA-3, MA-4, MA-5, SA-7, SC-13, SI-9.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to support the management of information
system accounts.
(2) The information system automatically terminates temporary and emergency accounts after
[Assignment: organization-defined time period for each type of account].
(3) The information system automatically disables inactive accounts after [Assignment: organizationdefined
time period].
(4) The information system automatically audits account creation, modification, disabling, and
termination actions and notifies, as required, appropriate individuals.
(5) The organization:
(a) Requires that users log out when [Assignment: organization defined time-period of expected
inactivity and/or description of when to log out];
(b) Determines normal time-of-day and duration usage for information system accounts;
(c) Monitors for atypical usage of information system accounts; and
(d) Reports atypical usage to designated organizational officials.
(6) The information system dynamically manages user privileges and associated access
authorizations.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: In contrast to conventional access control approaches
which employ static information system accounts and predefined sets of user privileges, many
service-oriented architecture implementations rely on run time access control decisions
facilitated by dynamic privilege management. While user identities remain relatively constant
over time, user privileges may change more frequently based on the ongoing mission/business
requirements and operational needs of the organization.
(7) The organization:
(a) Establishes and administers privileged user accounts in accordance with a role-based access
scheme that organizes information system and network privileges into roles; and
(b) Tracks and monitors privileged role assignments.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Privileged roles include, for example, key management,
network and system administration, database administration, web administration.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-2 MOD AC-2 (1) (2) (3) (4) HIGH AC-2 (1) (2) (3) (4)
AC-3 ACCESS ENFORCEMENT
Control: The information system enforces approved authorizations for logical access to the system
in accordance with applicable policy.
Supplemental Guidance: Access control policies (e.g., identity-based policies, role-based policies,
attribute-based policies) and access enforcement mechanisms (e.g., access control lists, access
control matrices, cryptography) are employed by organizations to control access between users (or
processes acting on behalf of users) and objects (e.g., devices, files, records, processes, programs,
domains) in the information system. In addition to enforcing authorized access at the information-
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-4


system level, access enforcement mechanisms are employed at the application level, when
necessary, to provide increased information security for the organization. Consideration is given
to the implementation of an audited, explicit override of automated mechanisms in the event of
emergencies or other serious events. If encryption of stored information is employed as an access
enforcement mechanism, the cryptography used is FIPS 140-2 (as amended) compliant. For
classified information, the cryptography used is largely dependent on the classification level of the
information and the clearances of the individuals having access to the information. Mechanisms
implemented by AC-3 are configured to enforce authorizations determined by other security
controls. Related controls: AC-2, AC-4, AC-5, AC-6, AC-16, AC-17, AC-18, AC-19, AC-20,
AC-21, AC-22, AU-9, CM-5, CM-6, MA-3, MA-4, MA-5, SA-7, SC-13, SI-9.
Control Enhancements:
(1) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC-6].
(2) The information system enforces dual authorization, based on organizational policies and
procedures for [Assignment: organization-defined privileged commands].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Dual authorization mechanisms require two forms of
approval to execute. The organization does not employ dual authorization mechanisms when
an immediate response is necessary to ensure public and environmental safety.
(3) The information system enforces [Assignment: organization-defined nondiscretionary access
control policies] over [Assignment: organization-defined set of users and resources] where the
policy rule set for each policy specifies:
(a) Access control information (i.e., attributes) employed by the policy rule set (e.g., position,
nationality, age, project, time of day); and
(b) Required relationships among the access control information to permit access.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Nondiscretionary access control policies that may be
implemented by organizations include, for example, Attribute-Based Access Control,
Mandatory Access Control, and Originator Controlled Access Control. Nondiscretionary
access control policies may be employed by organizations in addition to the employment of
discretionary access control policies.
For Mandatory Access Control (MAC): Policy establishes coverage over all subjects and
objects under its control to ensure that each user receives only that information to which the
user is authorized access based on classification of the information, and on user clearance and
formal access authorization. The information system assigns appropriate security attributes
(e.g., labels/security domains/types) to subjects and objects, and uses these attributes as the
basis for MAC decisions. The Bell-LaPadula security model defines allowed access with
regard to an organization-defined set of strictly hierarchical security levels as follows: A
subject can read an object only if the security level of the subject dominates the security level
of the object and a subject can write to an object only if two conditions are met: the security
level of the object dominates the security level of the subject, and the security level of the
user’s clearance dominates the security level of the object (no read up, no write down).
For Role-Based Access Control (RBAC): Policy establishes coverage over all users and
resources to ensure that access rights are grouped by role name, and access to resources is
restricted to users who have been authorized to assume the associated role.
(4) The information system enforces a Discretionary Access Control (DAC) policy that:
(a) Allows users to specify and control sharing by named individuals or groups of individuals, or
by both;
(b) Limits propagation of access rights; and
(c) Includes or excludes access to the granularity of a single user.
(5) The information system prevents access to [Assignment: organization-defined security-relevant
information] except during secure, nonoperable system states.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Security-relevant information is any information within
the information system that can potentially impact the operation of security functions in a
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-5


manner that could result in failure to enforce the system security policy or maintain isolation
of code and data. Filtering rules for routers and firewalls, cryptographic key management
information, key configuration parameters for security services, and access control lists are
examples of security-relevant information. Secure, nonoperable system states are states in
which the information system is not performing mission/business-related processing (e.g., the
system is off-line for maintenance, troubleshooting, boot-up, shutdown).
(6) The organization encrypts or stores off-line in a secure location [Assignment: organization-defined
user and/or system information].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The use of encryption by the organization reduces the
probability of unauthorized disclosure of information and can also detect unauthorized
changes to information. Removing information from online storage to offline storage
eliminates the possibility of individuals gaining unauthorized access via a network. Related
control: MP-4.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-3 MOD AC-3 HIGH AC-3
AC-4 INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT
Control: The information system enforces approved authorizations for controlling the flow of
information within the system and between interconnected systems in accordance with applicable
policy.
Supplemental Guidance: Information flow control regulates where information is allowed to travel
within an information system and between information systems (as opposed to who is allowed to
access the information) and without explicit regard to subsequent accesses to that information. A
few examples of flow control restrictions include: keeping export controlled information from
being transmitted in the clear to the Internet, blocking outside traffic that claims to be from within
the organization, and not passing any web requests to the Internet that are not from the internal
web proxy. Information flow control policies and enforcement mechanisms are commonly
employed by organizations to control the flow of information between designated sources and
destinations (e.g., networks, individuals, devices) within information systems and between
interconnected systems. Flow control is based on the characteristics of the information and/or the
information path. Specific examples of flow control enforcement can be found in boundary
protection devices (e.g., proxies, gateways, guards, encrypted tunnels, firewalls, and routers) that
employ rule sets or establish configuration settings that restrict information system services,
provide a packet-filtering capability based on header information, or message-filtering capability
based on content (e.g., using key word searches or document characteristics). Mechanisms
implemented by AC-4 are configured to enforce authorizations determined by other security
controls. Related controls: AC-17, AC-19, AC-21, CM-7, SA-8, SC-2, SC-5, SC-7, SC-18.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system enforces information flow control using explicit security attributes on
information, source, and destination objects as a basis for flow control decisions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Information flow enforcement mechanisms compare
security attributes on all information (data content and data structure), source and destination
objects, and respond appropriately (e.g., block, quarantine, alert administrator) when the
mechanisms encounter information flows not explicitly allowed by the information flow
policy. Information flow enforcement using explicit security attributes can be used, for
example, to control the release of certain types of information.
(2) The information system enforces information flow control using protected processing domains
(e.g., domain type-enforcement) as a basis for flow control decisions.
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-6


(3) The information system enforces dynamic information flow control based on policy that allows or
disallows information flows based on changing conditions or operational considerations.
(4) The information system prevents encrypted data from bypassing content-checking mechanisms.
(5) The information system enforces [Assignment: organization-defined limitations on the embedding
of data types within other data types].
(6) The information system enforces information flow control on metadata.
(7) The information system enforces [Assignment: organization-defined one-way flows] using
hardware mechanisms.
(8) The information system enforces information flow control using [Assignment: organization-defined
security policy filters] as a basis for flow control decisions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organization-defined security policy filters include, for
example, dirty word filters, file type checking filters, structured data filters, unstructured data
filters, metadata content filters, and hidden content filters. Structured data permits the
interpretation of its content by virtue of atomic elements that are understandable by an
application and indivisible. Unstructured data refers to masses of (usually) digital information
that does not have a data structure or has a data structure that is not easily readable by a
machine. Unstructured data consists of two basic categories: (i) bitmap objects that are
inherently non language-based (i.e., image, video, or audio files); and (ii) textual objects that
are based on a written or printed language (i.e., commercial off-the-shelf word processing
documents, spreadsheets, or emails).
(9) The information system enforces the use of human review for [Assignment: organization-defined
security policy filters] when the system is not capable of making an information flow control
decision.
(10) The information system provides the capability for a privileged administrator to enable/disable
[Assignment: organization-defined security policy filters].
(11) The information system provides the capability for a privileged administrator to configure
[Assignment: organization-defined security policy filters] to support different security policies.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: For example, to reflect changes in the security policy, an
administrator can change the list of “dirty words” that the security policy mechanism checks
in accordance with the definitions provided by the organization.
(12) The information system, when transferring information between different security domains,
identifies information flows by data type specification and usage.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Data type specification and usage include, for example,
using file naming to reflect type of data and limiting data transfer based on file type.
(13) The information system, when transferring information between different security domains,
decomposes information into policy-relevant subcomponents for submission to policy
enforcement mechanisms.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Policy enforcement mechanisms include the filtering
and/or sanitization rules that are applied to information prior to transfer to a different security
domain. Parsing transfer files facilitates policy decisions on source, destination, certificates,
classification, subject, attachments, and other information security-related component
differentiators. Policy rules for cross domain transfers include, for example, limitations on
embedding components/information types within other components/information types,
prohibiting more than two-levels of embedding, and prohibiting the transfer of archived
information types.
(14) The information system, when transferring information between different security domains,
implements policy filters that constrain data structure and content to [Assignment: organizationdefined
information security policy requirements].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Constraining file lengths, allowed enumerations, character
sets, schemas, and other data object attributes reduces the range of potential malicious and/or
unsanctioned content. Examples of constraints include ensuring that: (i) character data fields
only contain printable ASCII; (ii) character data fields only contain alpha-numeric characters;
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-7


(iii) character data fields do not contain special characters; or (iv) maximum field sizes and
file lengths are enforced based upon organization-defined security policy.
(15) The information system, when transferring information between different security domains, detects
unsanctioned information and prohibits the transfer of such information in accordance with the
security policy.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Actions to support this enhancement include: checking
all transferred information for malware, implementing dirty word list searches on transferred
information, and applying the same protection measures to metadata (e.g., security attributes)
that is applied to the information payload.
(16) The information system enforces security policies regarding information on interconnected
systems.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Transferring information between interconnected
information systems of differing security policies introduces risk that such transfers violate
one or more policies. While security policy violations may not be absolutely prohibited,
policy guidance from information owners/stewards is implemented at the policy enforcement
point between the interconnected systems. Specific architectural solutions are mandated,
when required, to reduce the potential for undiscovered vulnerabilities. Architectural
solutions include, for example: (i) prohibiting information transfers between interconnected
systems (i.e. implementing access only, one way transfer mechanisms); (ii) employing
hardware mechanisms to enforce unitary information flow directions; and (iii) implementing
fully tested, re-grading mechanisms to reassign security attributes and associated security
labels.
(17) The information system:
(a) Uniquely identifies and authenticates source and destination domains for information
transfer;
(b) Binds security attributes to information to facilitate information flow policy enforcement; and
(c) Tracks problems associated with the security attribute binding and information transfer.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Attribution is a critical component of a security concept
of operations. The ability to identify source and destination points for information flowing in
an information system, allows forensic reconstruction of events when required, and increases
policy compliance by attributing policy violations to specific organizations/individuals.
Means to enforce this enhancement include ensuring that the information system resolution
labels distinguish between information systems and organizations, and between specific
system components or individuals involved in preparing, sending, receiving, or disseminating
information.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD AC-4 HIGH AC-4
AC-5 SEPARATION OF DUTIES
Control: The organization:
a. Separates duties of individuals as necessary, to prevent malevolent activity without collusion;
b. Documents separation of duties; and
c. Implements separation of duties through assigned information system access authorizations.
Supplemental Guidance: Examples of separation of duties include: (i) mission functions and distinct
information system support functions are divided among different individuals/roles; (ii) different
individuals perform information system support functions (e.g., system management, systems
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-8


programming, configuration management, quality assurance and testing, network security); (iii)
security personnel who administer access control functions do not administer audit functions; and
(iv) different administrator accounts for different roles. Access authorizations defined in this
control are implemented by control AC-3. Related controls: AC-3.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD AC-5 HIGH AC-5
AC-6 LEAST PRIVILEGE
Control: The organization employs the concept of least privilege, allowing only authorized
accesses for users (and processes acting on behalf of users) which are necessary to accomplish
assigned tasks in accordance with organizational missions and business functions.
Supplemental Guidance: The access authorizations defined in this control are largely implemented
by control AC-3. The organization employs the concept of least privilege for specific duties and
information systems (including specific ports, protocols, and services) in accordance with risk
assessments as necessary to adequately mitigate risk to organizational operations and assets,
individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Related controls: AC-2, AC-3, CM-7.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization explicitly authorizes access to [Assignment: organization-defined list of security
functions (deployed in hardware, software, and firmware) and security-relevant information].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Establishing system accounts, configuring access
authorizations (i.e., permissions, privileges), setting events to be audited, and setting intrusion
detection parameters are examples of security functions. Explicitly authorized personnel
include, for example, security administrators, system and network administrators, system
security officers, system maintenance personnel, system programmers, and other privileged
users. Related control: AC-17.
(2) The organization requires that users of information system accounts, or roles, with access to
[Assignment: organization-defined list of security functions or security-relevant information], use
non-privileged accounts, or roles, when accessing other system functions, and if feasible, audits
any use of privileged accounts, or roles, for such functions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is intended to limit exposure
due to operating from within a privileged account or role. The inclusion of role is intended to
address those situations where an access control policy such as Role Based Access Control
(RBAC) is being implemented and where a change of role provides the same degree of
assurance in the change of access authorizations for both the user and all processes acting on
behalf of the user as would be provided by a change between a privileged and non-privileged
account. Audit of privileged activity may require physical separation employing information
systems on which the user does not have privileged access.
(3) The organization authorizes network access to [Assignment: organization-defined privileged
commands] only for compelling operational needs and documents the rationale for such access in
the security plan for the information system.
(4) The information system provides separate processing domains to enable finer-grained allocation
of user privileges.
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-9


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Employing virtualization techniques to allow greater
privilege within a virtual machine while restricting privilege to the underlying actual machine
is an example of providing separate processing domains for finer-grained allocation of user
privileges.
(5) The organization limits authorization to super user accounts on the information system to
designated system administration personnel.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Super user accounts are typically described as “root” or
“administrator” for various types of commercial off-the-shelf operating systems. Configuring
organizational information systems (e.g., notebook/laptop computers, servers, workstations)
such that day-to-day users are not authorized access to super user accounts is an example of
limiting system authorization. The organization may differentiate in the application of this
control enhancement between allowed privileges for local information system accounts and
for domain accounts provided the organization retains the ability to control the configuration
of the system with regard to key security parameters and as otherwise necessary to
sufficiently mitigate risk.
(6) The organization prohibits privileged access to the information system by non-organizational
users.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: A qualified organizational user may be advised by a nonorganizational
user, if necessary.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD AC-6 (1) (2) HIGH AC-6 (1) (2)
AC-7 UNSUCCESSFUL LOGIN ATTEMPTS
Control: The information system:
a. Enforces a limit of [Assignment: organization-defined number] consecutive invalid login
attempts by a user during a [Assignment: organization-defined time period]; and
b. Automatically [Selection: locks the account/node for an [Assignment: organization-defined
time period]; locks the account/node until released by an administrator; delays next login
prompt according to [Assignment: organization-defined delay algorithm]] when the
maximum number of unsuccessful attempts is exceeded. The control applies regardless of
whether the login occurs via a local or network connection.
Supplemental Guidance: Due to the potential for denial of service, automatic lockouts initiated by
the information system are usually temporary and automatically release after a predetermined time
period established by the organization. If a delay algorithm is selected, the organization may
chose to employ different algorithms for different information system components based on the
capabilities of those components. Response to unsuccessful login attempts may be implemented
at both the operating system and the application levels. This control applies to all accesses other
than those accesses explicitly identified and documented by the organization in AC-14.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system automatically locks the account/node until released by an administrator
when the maximum number of unsuccessful attempts is exceeded.
(2) The information system provides additional protection for mobile devices accessed via login by
purging information from the device after [Assignment: organization-defined number] consecutive,
unsuccessful login attempts to the device.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This enhancement applies only to mobile devices for
which a login occurs (e.g., personal digital assistants) and not to mobile devices accessed
without a login such as removable media. In certain situations, this enhancement may not
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-10


apply to mobile devices if the information on the device is encrypted with sufficiently strong
encryption mechanisms, making purging unnecessary. The login is to the mobile device, not
to any one account on the device. Therefore, a successful login to any account on the mobile
device resets the unsuccessful login count to zero.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW AC-7 MOD AC-7 HIGH AC-7
AC-8 SYSTEM USE NOTIFICATION
Control: The information system:
a. Displays an approved system use notification message or banner before granting access to the
system that provides privacy and security notices consistent with applicable federal laws,
Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance and states that: (i)
users are accessing a U.S. Government information system; (ii) system usage may be
monitored, recorded, and subject to audit; (iii) unauthorized use of the system is prohibited
and subject to criminal and civil penalties; and (iv) use of the system indicates consent to
monitoring and recording;
b. Retains the notification message or banner on the screen until users take explicit actions to log
on to or further access the information system; and
c. For publicly accessible systems: (i) displays the system use information when appropriate,
before granting further access; (ii) displays references, if any, to monitoring, recording, or
auditing that are consistent with privacy accommodations for such systems that generally
prohibit those activities; and (iii) includes in the notice given to public users of the
information system, a description of the authorized uses of the system.
Supplemental Guidance: System use notification messages can be implemented in the form of
warning banners displayed when individuals log in to the information system. System use
notification is intended only for information system access that includes an interactive login
interface with a human user and is not intended to require notification when an interactive
interface does not exist.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-8 MOD AC-8 HIGH AC-8
AC-9 PREVIOUS LOGON (ACCESS) NOTIFICATION
Control: The information system notifies the user, upon successful logon (access), of the date and
time of the last logon (access).
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to cover both traditional logons to information
systems and general accesses to information systems that occur in other types of architectural
configurations (e.g., service oriented architectures).
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system notifies the user, upon successful logon/access, of the number of
unsuccessful logon/access attempts since the last successful logon/access.
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-11


(2) The information system notifies the user of the number of [Selection: successful logins/accesses;
unsuccessful login/access attempts; both] during [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
(3) The information system notifies the user of [Assignment: organization-defined set of securityrelated
changes to the user’s account] during [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
AC-10 CONCURRENT SESSION CONTROL
Control: The information system limits the number of concurrent sessions for each system account
to [Assignment: organization-defined number].
Supplemental Guidance: The organization may define the maximum number of concurrent sessions
for an information system account globally, by account type, by account, or a combination. This
control addresses concurrent sessions for a given information system account and does not address
concurrent sessions by a single user via multiple system accounts.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH AC-10
AC-11 SESSION LOCK
Control: The information system:
a. Prevents further access to the system by initiating a session lock after [Assignment:
organization-defined time period] of inactivity or upon receiving a request from a user; and
b. Retains the session lock until the user reestablishes access using established identification and
authentication procedures.
Supplemental Guidance: A session lock is a temporary action taken when a user stops work and
moves away from the immediate physical vicinity of the information system but does not want to
log out because of the temporary nature of the absence. The session lock is implemented at the
point where session activity can be determined. This is typically at the operating system-level, but
may be at the application-level. A session lock is not a substitute for logging out of the
information system, for example, if the organization requires users to log out at the end of the
workday.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system session lock mechanism, when activated on a device with a display
screen, places a publicly viewable pattern onto the associated display, hiding what was previously
visible on the screen.
References: OMB Memorandum 06-16.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW Not Selected MOD AC-11 HIGH AC-11
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-12


AC-12 SESSION TERMINATION
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC-10].
AC-13 SUPERVISION AND REVIEW — ACCESS CONTROL
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC-2 and AU-6].
AC-14 PERMITTED ACTIONS WITHOUT IDENTIFICATION OR AUTHENTICATION
Control: The organization:
a. Identifies specific user actions that can be performed on the information system without
identification or authentication; and
b. Documents and provides supporting rationale in the security plan for the information system,
user actions not requiring identification and authentication.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended for those specific instances where an organization
determines that no identification and authentication is required; it is not, however, mandating that
such instances exist in given information system. The organization may allow a limited number of
user actions without identification and authentication (e.g., when individuals access public
websites or other publicly accessible federal information systems such as http://www.usa.gov).
Organizations also identify any actions that normally require identification or authentication but
may under certain circumstances (e.g., emergencies), allow identification or authentication
mechanisms to be bypassed. Such bypass may be, for example, via a software-readable physical
switch that commands bypass of the login functionality and is protected from accidental or
unmonitored use. This control does not apply to situations where identification and authentication
have already occurred and are not being repeated, but rather to situations where identification
and/or authentication have not yet occurred. Related control: CP-2, IA-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization permits actions to be performed without identification and authentication only to
the extent necessary to accomplish mission/business objectives.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-14 MOD AC-14 (1) HIGH AC-14 (1)
AC-15 AUTOMATED MARKING
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP-3].
AC-16 SECURITY ATTRIBUTES
Control: The information system supports and maintains the binding of [Assignment: organizationdefined
security attributes] to information in storage, in process, and in transmission.
Supplemental Guidance: Security attributes are abstractions representing the basic properties or
characteristics of an entity (e.g., subjects and objects) with respect to safeguarding information.
These attributes are typically associated with internal data structures (e.g., records, buffers, files)
within the information system and are used to enable the implementation of access control and
flow control policies, reflect special dissemination, handling or distribution instructions, or
support other aspects of the information security policy. The term security label is often used to
associate a set of security attributes with a specific information object as part of the data structure
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-13


for that object (e.g., user access privileges, nationality, affiliation as contractor). Related controls:
AC-3, AC-4, SC-16, MP-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system dynamically reconfigures security attributes in accordance with an
identified security policy as information is created and combined.
(2) The information system allows authorized entities to change security attributes.
(3) The information system maintains the binding of security attributes to information with sufficient
assurance that the information--attribute association can be used as the basis for automated policy
actions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of automated policy actions include automated
access control decisions (e.g., Mandatory Access Control decisions), or decisions to release
(or not release) information (e.g., information flows via cross domain systems).
(4) The information system allows authorized users to associate security attributes with information.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The support provided by the information system can vary
from prompting users to select security attributes to be associated with specific information
objects, to ensuring that the combination of attributes selected is valid.
(5) The information system displays security attributes in human-readable form on each object output
from the system to system output devices to identify [Assignment: organization-identified set of
special dissemination, handling, or distribution instructions] using [Assignment: organizationidentified
human readable, standard naming conventions].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Objects output from the information system include, for
example, pages, screens, or equivalent. Output devices include, for example, printers and
video displays on computer terminals, monitors, screens on notebook/laptop computers and
personal digital assistants.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
AC-17 REMOTE ACCESS
Control: The organization:
a. Documents allowed methods of remote access to the information system;
b. Establishes usage restrictions and implementation guidance for each allowed remote access
method;
c. Monitors for unauthorized remote access to the information system;
d. Authorizes remote access to the information system prior to connection; and
e. Enforces requirements for remote connections to the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: This control requires explicit authorization prior to allowing remote access
to an information system without specifying a specific format for that authorization. For example,
while the organization may deem it appropriate to use a system interconnection agreement to
authorize a given remote access, such agreements are not required by this control. Remote access
is any access to an organizational information system by a user (or process acting on behalf of a
user) communicating through an external network (e.g., the Internet). Examples of remote access
methods include dial-up, broadband, and wireless (see AC-18 for wireless access). A virtual
private network when adequately provisioned with appropriate security controls, is considered an
internal network (i.e., the organization establishes a network connection between organizationcontrolled
endpoints in a manner that does not require the organization to depend on external
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-14


networks to protect the confidentiality or integrity of information transmitted across the network).
Remote access controls are applicable to information systems other than public web servers or
systems specifically designed for public access. Enforcing access restrictions associated with
remote connections is accomplished by control AC-3. Related controls: AC-3, AC-18, AC-20,
IA-2, IA-3, IA-8, MA-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to facilitate the monitoring and control of
remote access methods.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Automated monitoring of remote access sessions allows
organizations to audit user activities on a variety of information system components (e.g.,
servers, workstations, notebook/laptop computers) and to ensure compliance with remote
access policy.
(2) The organization uses cryptography to protect the confidentiality and integrity of remote access
sessions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The encryption strength of mechanism is selected based
on the security categorization of the information. Related controls: SC-8, SC-9, SC-13.
(3) The information system routes all remote accesses through a limited number of managed access
control points.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: SC-7.
(4) The organization authorizes the execution of privileged commands and access to security-relevant
information via remote access only for compelling operational needs and documents the rationale
for such access in the security plan for the information system.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: AC-6.
(5) The organization monitors for unauthorized remote connections to the information system
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency], and takes appropriate action if an unauthorized
connection is discovered.
(6) The organization ensures that users protect information about remote access mechanisms from
unauthorized use and disclosure.
(7) The organization ensures that remote sessions for accessing [Assignment: organization-defined
list of security functions and security-relevant information] employ [Assignment: organizationdefined
additional security measures] and are audited.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Additional security measures are typically above and
beyond standard bulk or session layer encryption (e.g., Secure Shell [SSH], Virtual Private
Networking [VPN] with blocking mode enabled). Related controls: SC-8, SC-9.
(8) The organization disables [Assignment: organization-defined networking protocols within the
information system deemed to be nonsecure] except for explicitly identified components in
support of specific operational requirements.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The organization can either make a determination of the
relative security of the networking protocol or base the security decision on the assessment of
other entities. Bluetooth and peer-to-peer networking are examples of less than secure
networking protocols.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-46, 800-77, 800-113, 800-114, 800-121.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-17 MOD AC-17 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (7) (8) HIGH AC-17 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (7) (8)
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-15


AC-18 WIRELESS ACCESS
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes usage restrictions and implementation guidance for wireless access;
b. Monitors for unauthorized wireless access to the information system;
c. Authorizes wireless access to the information system prior to connection; and
d. Enforces requirements for wireless connections to the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: Wireless technologies include, but are not limited to, microwave, satellite,
packet radio (UHF/VHF), 802.11x, and Bluetooth. Wireless networks use authentication
protocols (e.g., EAP/TLS, PEAP), which provide credential protection and mutual authentication.
In certain situations, wireless signals may radiate beyond the confines and control of organizationcontrolled
facilities. Related controls: AC-3, IA-2, IA-3, IA-8.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system protects wireless access to the system using authentication and
encryption.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Authentication applies to user, device, or both as
necessary. Related control: SC-13.
(2) The organization monitors for unauthorized wireless connections to the information system,
including scanning for unauthorized wireless access points [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency], and takes appropriate action if an unauthorized connection is discovered.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organizations proactively search for unauthorized
wireless connections including the conduct of thorough scans for unauthorized wireless access
points. The scan is not necessarily limited to only those areas within the facility containing
the information systems, yet is conducted outside of those areas only as needed to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to the system.
(3) The organization disables, when not intended for use, wireless networking capabilities internally
embedded within information system components prior to issuance and deployment.
(4) The organization does not allow users to independently configure wireless networking capabilities.
(5) The organization confines wireless communications to organization-controlled boundaries.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Actions that may be taken by the organization to confine
wireless communications to organization-controlled boundaries include: (i) reducing the
power of the wireless transmission such that it cannot transit the physical perimeter of the
organization; (ii) employing measures such as TEMPEST to control wireless emanations; and
(iii) configuring the wireless access such that it is point to point in nature.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-48, 800-94, 800-97.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-18 MOD AC-18 (1) HIGH AC-18 (1) (2) (4) (5)
AC-19 ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes usage restrictions and implementation guidance for organization-controlled
mobile devices;
b. Authorizes connection of mobile devices meeting organizational usage restrictions and
implementation guidance to organizational information systems;
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-16


c. Monitors for unauthorized connections of mobile devices to organizational information
systems;
d. Enforces requirements for the connection of mobile devices to organizational information
systems;
e. Disables information system functionality that provides the capability for automatic execution
of code on mobile devices without user direction;
f. Issues specially configured mobile devices to individuals traveling to locations that the
organization deems to be of significant risk in accordance with organizational policies and
procedures; and
g. Applies [Assignment: organization-defined inspection and preventative measures] to mobile
devices returning from locations that the organization deems to be of significant risk in
accordance with organizational policies and procedures.
Supplemental Guidance: Mobile devices include portable storage media (e.g., USB memory sticks,
external hard disk drives) and portable computing and communications devices with information
storage capability (e.g., notebook/laptop computers, personal digital assistants, cellular telephones,
digital cameras, and audio recording devices). Organization-controlled mobile devices include
those devices for which the organization has the authority to specify and the ability to enforce
specific security requirements. Usage restrictions and implementation guidance related to mobile
devices include, for example, configuration management, device identification and authentication,
implementation of mandatory protective software (e.g., malicious code detection, firewall),
scanning devices for malicious code, updating virus protection software, scanning for critical
software updates and patches, conducting primary operating system (and possibly other resident
software) integrity checks, and disabling unnecessary hardware (e.g., wireless, infrared).
Examples of information system functionality that provide the capability for automatic execution
of code are AutoRun and AutoPlay.
Organizational policies and procedures for mobile devices used by individuals departing on and
returning from travel include, for example, determining which locations are of concern, defining
required configurations for the devices, ensuring that the devices are configured as intended before
travel is initiated, and applying specific measures to the device after travel is completed. Specially
configured mobile devices include, for example, computers with sanitized hard drives, limited
applications, and additional hardening (e.g., more stringent configuration settings). Specified
measures applied to mobile devices upon return from travel include, for example, examining the
device for signs of physical tampering and purging/reimaging the hard disk drive. Protecting
information residing on mobile devices is covered in the media protection family. Related
controls: MP-4, MP-5.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization restricts the use of writable, removable media in organizational information
systems.
(2) The organization prohibits the use of personally owned, removable media in organizational
information systems.
(3) The organization prohibits the use of removable media in organizational information systems when
the media has no identifiable owner.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An identifiable owner (e.g., individual, organization, or
project) for removable media helps to reduce the risk of using such technology by assigning
responsibility and accountability for addressing known vulnerabilities in the media (e.g.,
malicious code insertion).
(4) The organization:
(a) Prohibits the use of unclassified mobile devices in facilities containing information systems
processing, storing, or transmitting classified information unless specifically permitted by the
appropriate authorizing official(s); and
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-17


(b) Enforces the following restrictions on individuals permitted to use mobile devices in facilities
containing information systems processing, storing, or transmitting classified information:
- Connection of unclassified mobile devices to classified information systems is
prohibited;
- Connection of unclassified mobile devices to unclassified information systems requires
approval from the appropriate authorizing official(s);
- Use of internal or external modems or wireless interfaces within the mobile devices is
prohibited; and
- Mobile devices and the information stored on those devices are subject to random
reviews/inspections by [Assignment: organization-defined security officials], and if
classified information is found, the incident handling policy is followed.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-114, 800-124.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-19 MOD AC-19 (1) (2) (3) HIGH AC-19 (1) (2) (3)
AC-20 USE OF EXTERNAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Control: The organization establishes terms and conditions, consistent with any trust relationships
established with other organizations owning, operating, and/or maintaining external information
systems, allowing authorized individuals to:
a. Access the information system from the external information systems; and
b. Process, store, and/or transmit organization-controlled information using the external
information systems.
Supplemental Guidance: External information systems are information systems or components of
information systems that are outside of the authorization boundary established by the organization
and for which the organization typically has no direct supervision and authority over the
application of required security controls or the assessment of security control effectiveness.
External information systems include, but are not limited to: (i) personally owned information
systems (e.g., computers, cellular telephones, or personal digital assistants); (ii) privately owned
computing and communications devices resident in commercial or public facilities (e.g., hotels,
convention centers, or airports); (iii) information systems owned or controlled by nonfederal
governmental organizations; and (iv) federal information systems that are not owned by, operated
by, or under the direct supervision and authority of the organization. For some external systems,
in particular those systems operated by other federal agencies, including organizations subordinate
to those agencies, the trust relationships that have been established between those organizations
and the originating organization may be such, that no explicit terms and conditions are required.
In effect, the information systems of these organizations would not be considered external. These
situations typically occur when, for example, there is some pre-existing sharing or trust agreement
(either implicit or explicit) established between federal agencies and/or organizations subordinate
to those agencies, or such trust agreements are specified by applicable laws, Executive Orders,
directives, or policies. Authorized individuals include organizational personnel, contractors, or
any other individuals with authorized access to the organizational information system and over
which the organization has the authority to impose rules of behavior with regard to system access.
The restrictions that an organization imposes on authorized individuals need not be uniform, as
those restrictions are likely to vary depending upon the trust relationships between organizations.
Thus, an organization might impose more stringent security restrictions on a contractor than on a
state, local, or tribal government.
This control does not apply to the use of external information systems to access public interfaces
to organizational information systems and information (e.g., individuals accessing federal
information through www.usa.gov). The organization establishes terms and conditions for the use
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-18


of external information systems in accordance with organizational security policies and
procedures. The terms and conditions address as a minimum; (i) the types of applications that can
be accessed on the organizational information system from the external information system; and
(ii) the maximum security categorization of information that can be processed, stored, and
transmitted on the external information system. This control defines access authorizations
enforced by AC-3, rules of behavior requirements enforced by PL-4, and session establishment
rules enforced by AC-17. Related controls: AC-3, AC-17, PL-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization permits authorized individuals to use an external information system to access
the information system or to process, store, or transmit organization-controlled information only
when the organization:
(a) Can verify the implementation of required security controls on the external system as
specified in the organization’s information security policy and security plan; or
(b) Has approved information system connection or processing agreements with the
organizational entity hosting the external information system.
(2) The organization limits the use of organization-controlled portable storage media by authorized
individuals on external information systems.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Limits on the use of organization-controlled portable
storage media in external information systems can include, for example, complete prohibition
of the use of such devices or restrictions on how the devices may be used and under what
conditions the devices may be used.
References: FIPS Publication 199.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AC-20 MOD AC-20 (1) (2) HIGH AC-20 (1) (2)
AC-21 USER-BASED COLLABORATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
Control: The organization:
a. Facilitates information sharing by enabling authorized users to determine whether access
authorizations assigned to the sharing partner match the access restrictions on the information
for [Assignment: organization-defined information sharing circumstances where user
discretion is required]; and
b. Employs [Assignment: list of organization-defined information sharing circumstances and
automated mechanisms or manual processes required] to assist users in making information
sharing/collaboration decisions.
Supplemental Guidance: The control applies to information that may be restricted in some manner
(e.g., privileged medical, contract-sensitive, proprietary, personally identifiable information,
special access programs/compartments) based on some formal or administrative determination.
Depending on the information-sharing circumstance, the sharing partner may be defined at the
individual, group, or organization level and information may be defined by specific content, type,
or security categorization. Related control: AC-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system employs automated mechanisms to enable authorized users to make
information-sharing decisions based on access authorizations of sharing partners and access
restrictions on information to be shared.
References: None.
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-19


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
AC-22 PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE CONTENT
Control: The organization:
a. Designates individuals authorized to post information onto an organizational information
system that is publicly accessible;
b. Trains authorized individuals to ensure that publicly accessible information does not contain
nonpublic information;
c. Reviews the proposed content of publicly accessible information for nonpublic information
prior to posting onto the organizational information system;
d. Reviews the content on the publicly accessible organizational information system for
nonpublic information [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
e. Removes nonpublic information from the publicly accessible organizational information
system, if discovered.
Supplemental Guidance: Nonpublic information is any information for which the general public is
not authorized access in accordance with federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies,
regulations, standards, or guidance. Information protected under the Privacy Act and vendor
proprietary information are examples of nonpublic information. This control addresses posting
information on an organizational information system that is accessible to the general public,
typically without identification or authentication. The posting of information on non-organization
information systems is covered by appropriate organizational policy. Related controls: AC-3, AU-
13.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW AC-22 MOD AC-22 HIGH AC-22
APPENDIX F-AC PAGE F-20


FAMILY: AWARENESS AND TRAINING CLASS: OPERATIONAL
AT-1 SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented security awareness and training policy that addresses purpose, scope,
roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities,
and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the security awareness and
training policy and associated security awareness and training controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the security awareness and training family. The policy and procedures are consistent with
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The security awareness and training policy can be
included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. Security
awareness and training procedures can be developed for the security program in general and for a
particular information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy is a
key factor in the development of the security awareness and training policy. Related control: PM-
9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-16, 800-50, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AT-1 MOD AT-1 HIGH AT-1
AT-2 SECURITY AWARENESS
Control: The organization provides basic security awareness training to all information system
users (including managers, senior executives, and contractors) as part of initial training for new
users, when required by system changes, and [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]
thereafter.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization determines the appropriate content of security awareness
training and security awareness techniques based on the specific requirements of the organization
and the information systems to which personnel have authorized access. The content includes a
basic understanding of the need for information security and user actions to maintain security and
to respond to suspected security incidents. The content also addresses awareness of the need for
operations security as it relates to the organization’s information security program. Security
awareness techniques can include, for example, displaying posters, offering supplies inscribed
with security reminders, generating email advisories/notices from senior organizational officials,
displaying logon screen messages, and conducting information security awareness events.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization includes practical exercises in security awareness training that simulate actual
cyber attacks.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Practical exercises may include, for example, no-notice
social engineering attempts to collect information, gain unauthorized access, or simulate the
adverse impact of opening malicious email attachments or invoking malicious web links.
APPENDIX F-AT PAGE F-21


References: C.F.R. Part 5 Subpart C (5 C.F.R 930.301); NIST Special Publication 800-50.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AT-2 MOD AT-2 HIGH AT-2
AT-3 SECURITY TRAINING
Control: The organization provides role-based security-related training: (i) before authorizing
access to the system or performing assigned duties; (ii) when required by system changes; and (iii)
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] thereafter.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization determines the appropriate content of security training
based on assigned roles and responsibilities and the specific requirements of the organization and
the information systems to which personnel have authorized access. In addition, the organization
provides information system managers, system and network administrators, personnel performing
independent verification and validation activities, security control assessors, and other personnel
having access to system-level software, adequate security-related technical training to perform
their assigned duties. Organizational security training addresses management, operational, and
technical roles and responsibilities covering physical, personnel, and technical safeguards and
countermeasures. The organization also provides the training necessary for these individuals to
carry out their responsibilities related to operations security within the context of the
organization’s information security program. Related controls: AT-2, SA-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization provides employees with initial and [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] training in the employment and operation of environmental controls.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Environmental controls include, for example, fire
suppression and detection devices/systems, sprinkler systems, handheld fire extinguishers,
fixed fire hoses, smoke detectors, temperature/humidity, HVAC, and power within the
facility.
(2) The organization provides employees with initial and [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] training in the employment and operation of physical security controls.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Physical security controls include, for example, physical
access control devices, physical intrusion alarms, monitoring and surveillance equipment, and
security guards (deployment and operating procedures).
References: C.F.R. Part 5 Subpart C (5 C.F.R 930.301); NIST Special Publications 800-16, 800-
50.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AT-3 MOD AT-3 HIGH AT-3
AT-4 SECURITY TRAINING RECORDS
Control: The organization:
a. Documents and monitors individual information system security training activities including
basic security awareness training and specific information system security training; and
b. Retains individual training records for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Supplemental Guidance: While an organization may deem that organizationally mandated individual
training programs and the development of individual training plans are necessary, this control does
APPENDIX F-AT PAGE F-22


not mandate either. Documentation for specialized training may be maintained by individual
supervisors at the option of the organization.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW AT-4 MOD AT-4 HIGH AT-4
AT-5 CONTACTS WITH SECURITY GROUPS AND ASSOCIATIONS
Control: The organization establishes and institutionalizes contact with selected groups and
associations within the security community:
- To facilitate ongoing security education and training for organizational personnel;
- To stay up to date with the latest recommended security practices, techniques, and
technologies; and
- To share current security-related information including threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents.
Supplemental Guidance: Ongoing contact with security groups and associations is of paramount
importance in an environment of rapid technology changes and dynamic threats. Security groups
and associations can include, for example, special interest groups, specialized forums, professional
associations, news groups, and/or peer groups of security professionals in similar organizations.
The groups and associations selected are consistent with the organization’s mission/business
requirements. Information-sharing activities regarding threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents
related to information systems are consistent with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders,
directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
APPENDIX F-AT PAGE F-23


FAMILY: AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY CLASS: TECHNICAL
AU-1 AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented audit and accountability policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the audit and
accountability policy and associated audit and accountability controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the audit and accountability family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable
federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The audit and accountability policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Audit and accountability procedures can be
developed for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when
required. The organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the
audit and accountability policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-1 MOD AU-1 HIGH AU-1
AU-2 AUDITABLE EVENTS
Control: The organization:
a. Determines, based on a risk assessment and mission/business needs, that the information
system must be capable of auditing the following events: [Assignment: organization-defined
list of auditable events];
b. Coordinates the security audit function with other organizational entities requiring auditrelated
information to enhance mutual support and to help guide the selection of auditable
events;
c. Provides a rationale for why the list of auditable events are deemed to be adequate to support
after-the-fact investigations of security incidents; and
d. Determines, based on current threat information and ongoing assessment of risk, that the
following events are to be audited within the information system: [Assignment: organizationdefined
subset of the auditable events defined in AU-2 a. to be audited along with the
frequency of (or situation requiring) auditing for each identified event].
Supplemental Guidance: The purpose of this control is for the organization to identify events which
need to be auditable as significant and relevant to the security of the information system; giving an
overall system requirement in order to meet ongoing and specific audit needs. To balance auditing
requirements with other information system needs, this control also requires identifying that subset
of auditable events that are to be audited at a given point in time. For example, the organization
may determine that the information system must have the capability to log every file access both
successful and unsuccessful, but not activate that capability except for specific circumstances due
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-24


to the extreme burden on system performance. In addition, audit records can be generated at
various levels of abstraction, including at the packet level as information traverses the network.
Selecting the right level of abstraction for audit record generation is a critical aspect of an audit
capability and can facilitate the identification of root causes to problems. Related control: AU-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into AU-12].
(2) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into AU-12].
(3) The organization reviews and updates the list of auditable events [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The list of auditable events is defined in AU-2.
(4) The organization includes execution of privileged functions in the list of events to be audited by
the information system.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-92; Web: CSRC.NIST.GOV/PCIG/CIG.HTML.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-2 MOD AU-2 (3) (4) HIGH AU-2 (3) (4)
AU-3 CONTENT OF AUDIT RECORDS
Control: The information system produces audit records that contain sufficient information to, at a
minimum, establish what type of event occurred, when (date and time) the event occurred, where
the event occurred, the source of the event, the outcome (success or failure) of the event, and the
identity of any user/subject associated with the event.
Supplemental Guidance: Audit record content that may be necessary to satisfy the requirement of
this control, includes, for example, time stamps, source and destination addresses, user/process
identifiers, event descriptions, success/fail indications, filenames involved, and access control or
flow control rules invoked. Related controls: AU-2, AU-8.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system includes [Assignment: organization-defined additional, more detailed
information] in the audit records for audit events identified by type, location, or subject.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An example of detailed information that the organization
may require in audit records is full-text recording of privileged commands or the individual
identities of group account users.
(2) The organization centrally manages the content of audit records generated by [Assignment:
organization-defined information system components].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-3 MOD AU-3 (1) HIGH AU-3 (1) (2)
AU-4 AUDIT STORAGE CAPACITY
Control: The organization allocates audit record storage capacity and configures auditing to reduce
the likelihood of such capacity being exceeded.
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-25


Supplemental Guidance: The organization considers the types of auditing to be performed and the
audit processing requirements when allocating audit storage capacity. Related controls: AU-2,
AU-5, AU-6, AU-7, SI-4.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-4 MOD AU-4 HIGH AU-4
AU-5 RESPONSE TO AUDIT PROCESSING FAILURES
Control: The information system:
a. Alerts designated organizational officials in the event of an audit processing failure; and
b. Takes the following additional actions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions to be taken
(e.g., shut down information system, overwrite oldest audit records, stop generating audit
records)].
Supplemental Guidance: Audit processing failures include, for example, software/hardware errors,
failures in the audit capturing mechanisms, and audit storage capacity being reached or exceeded.
Related control: AU-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system provides a warning when allocated audit record storage volume reaches
[Assignment: organi zation-defined percentage] of maximum audit record storage capacity.
(2) The information system provides a real-time alert when the following audit failure events occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined audit failure events requiring real-time alerts].
(3) The information system enforces configurable traffic volume thresholds representing auditing
capacity for network traffic and [Selection: rejects or delays] network traffic above those
thresholds.
(4) The information system invokes a system shutdown in the event of an audit failure, unless an
alternative audit capability exists.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-5 MOD AU-5 HIGH AU-5 (1) (2)
AU-6 AUDIT REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING
Control: The organization:
a. Reviews and analyzes information system audit records [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] for indications of inappropriate or unusual activity, and reports findings to
designated organizational officials; and
b. Adjusts the level of audit review, analysis, and reporting within the information system when
there is a change in risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other
organizations, or the Nation based on law enforcement information, intelligence information,
or other credible sources of information.
Supplemental Guidance: Related control: AU-7.
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-26


Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system integrates audit review, analysis, and reporting processes to support
organizational processes for investigation and response to suspicious activities.
(2) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI-4].
(3) The organization analyzes and correlates audit records across different repositories to gain
organization-wide situational awareness.
(4) The information system centralizes the review and analysis of audit records from multiple
components within the system.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An example of an automated mechanism for centralized
review and analysis is a Security Information Management (SIM) product. Related control:
AU-2.
(5) The organization integrates analysis of audit records with analysis of vulnerability scanning
information, performance data, and network monitoring information to further enhance the ability
to identify inappropriate or unusual activity.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: A Security Event/Information Management system tool
can facilitate audit record aggregation and consolidation from multiple information system
components as well as audit record correlation and analysis. The use of standardized audit
record analysis scripts developed by the organization (with localized script adjustments, as
necessary), provides a more cost-effective approach for analyzing audit record information
collected. The correlation of audit record information with vulnerability scanning information
is important in determining the veracity of the vulnerability scans and correlating attack
detection events with scanning results. Related control: AU-7, RA-5, SI-4.
(6) The organization correlates information from audit records with information obtained from
monitoring physical access to further enhance the ability to identify suspicious, inappropriate,
unusual, or malevolent activity.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: PE-6.
(7) The organization specifies the permitted actions for each authorized information system process,
role, and/or user in the audit and accountability policy.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Permitted actions for information system processes, roles,
and/or users associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit records include, for
example, read, write, append, and delete.
(8) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI-4].
(9) The organization performs, in a physically dedicated information system, full-text analysis of
privileged functions executed.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-6 MOD AU-6 HIGH AU-6 (1)
AU-7 AUDIT REDUCTION AND REPORT GENERATION
Control: The information system provides an audit reduction and report generation capability.
Supplemental Guidance: An audit reduction and report generation capability provides support for
near real-time audit review, analysis, and reporting requirements described in AU-6 and after-thefact
investigations of security incidents. Audit reduction and reporting tools do not alter original
audit records. Related control: AU-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system provides the capability to automatically process audit records for events
of interest based on selectable event criteria.
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-27


References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD AU-7 (1) HIGH AU-7 (1)
AU-8 TIME STAMPS
Control: The information system uses internal system clocks to generate time stamps for audit
records.
Supplemental Guidance: Time stamps generated by the information system include both date and
time. The time may be expressed in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), a modern continuation
of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), or local time with an offset from UTC. Related control: AU-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system synchronizes internal information system clocks [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] with [Assignment: organization-defined authoritative time source].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-8 MOD AU-8 (1) HIGH AU-8 (1)
AU-9 PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION
Control: The information system protects audit information and audit tools from unauthorized
access, modification, and deletion.
Supplemental Guidance: Audit information includes all information (e.g., audit records, audit
settings, and audit reports) needed to successfully audit information system activity. Related
controls: AC-3, AC-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system produces audit records on hardware-enforced, write-once media.
(2) The information system backs up audit records [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] onto
a different system or media than the system being audited.
(3) The information system uses cryptographic mechanisms to protect the integrity of audit
information and audit tools.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An example of a cryptographic mechanism for the
protection of integrity is the computation and application of a cryptographic-signed hash
using asymmetric cryptography, protecting the confidentiality of the key used to generate the
hash, and using the public key to verify the hash information.
(4) The organization:
(a) Authorizes access to management of audit functionality to only a limited subset of privileged
users; and
(b) Protects the audit records of non-local accesses to privileged accounts and the execution of
privileged functions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Auditing may not be reliable when performed by the
information system to which the user being audited has privileged access. The privileged user
may inhibit auditing or modify audit records. This control enhancement helps mitigate this
risk by requiring that privileged access be further defined between audit-related privileges and
other privileges, thus, limiting the users with audit-related privileges. Reducing the risk of
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-28


audit compromises by privileged users can also be achieved, for example, by performing audit
activity on a separate information system or by using storage media that cannot be modified
(e.g., write-once recording devices).
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-9 MOD AU-9 HIGH AU-9
AU-10 NON-REPUDIATION
Control: The information system protects against an individual falsely denying having performed a
particular action.
Supplemental Guidance: Examples of particular actions taken by individuals include creating
information, sending a message, approving information (e.g., indicating concurrence or signing a
contract), and receiving a message. Non-repudiation protects individuals against later claims by
an author of not having authored a particular document, a sender of not having transmitted a
message, a receiver of not having received a message, or a signatory of not having signed a
document. Non-repudiation services can be used to determine if information originated from an
individual, or if an individual took specific actions (e.g., sending an email, signing a contract,
approving a procurement request) or received specific information. Non-repudiation services are
obtained by employing various techniques or mechanisms (e.g., digital signatures, digital message
receipts).
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system associates the identity of the information producer with the information.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement supports audit requirements
that provide appropriate organizational officials the means to identify who produced specific
information in the event of an information transfer. The nature and strength of the binding
between the information producer and the information are determined and approved by the
appropriate organizational officials based on the security categorization of the information
and relevant risk factors.
(2) The information system validates the binding of the information producer’s identity to the
information.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is intended to mitigate the risk
that information is modified between production and review. The validation of bindings can
be achieved, for example, by the use of cryptographic checksums.
(3) The information system maintains reviewer/releaser identity and credentials within the established
chain of custody for all information reviewed or released.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: If the reviewer is a human or if the review function is
automated but separate from the release/transfer function, the information system associates
the identity of the reviewer of the information to be released with the information and the
information label. In the case of human reviews, this control enhancement provides
appropriate organizational officials the means to identify who reviewed and released the
information. In the case of automated reviews, this control enhancement helps ensure that
only approved review functions are employed.
(4) The information system validates the binding of the reviewer’s identity to the information at the
transfer/release point prior to release/transfer from one security domain to another security
domain.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is intended to mitigate the risk
that information is modified between review and transfer/release.
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-29


(5) The organization employs [Selection: FIPS-validated; NSA-approved] cryptography to implement
digital signatures.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: SC-13.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH AU-10
AU-11 AUDIT RECORD RETENTION
Control: The organization retains audit records for [Assignment: organization-defined time period
consistent with records retention policy] to provide support for after-the-fact investigations of
security incidents and to meet regulatory and organizational information retention requirements.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization retains audit records until it is determined that they are no
longer needed for administrative, legal, audit, or other operational purposes. This includes, for
example, retention and availability of audit records relative to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
requests, subpoena, and law enforcement actions. Standard categorizations of audit records
relative to such types of actions and standard response processes for each type of action are
developed and disseminated. The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)
General Records Schedules (GRS) provide federal policy on record retention.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW AU-11 MOD AU-11 HIGH AU-11
AU-12 AUDIT GENERATION
Control: The information system:
a. Provides audit record generation capability for the list of auditable events defined in AU-2 at
[Assignment: organization-defined information system components];
b. Allows designated organizational personnel to select which auditable events are to be audited
by specific components of the system; and
c. Generates audit records for the list of audited events defined in AU-2 with the content as
defined in AU-3.
Supplemental Guidance: Audits records can be generated from various components within the
information system. The list of audited events is the set of events for which audits are to be
generated. This set of events is typically a subset of the list of all events for which the system is
capable of generating audit records (i.e., auditable events). Related controls: AU-2, AU-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system compiles audit records from [Assignment: organization-defined
information system components] into a system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail that is timecorrelated
to within [Assignment: organization-defined level of tolerance for relationship between
time stamps of individual records in the audit trail].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The audit trail is time-correlated if the time stamp in the
individual audit records can be reliably related to the time stamp in other audit records to
achieve a time ordering of the records within the organization-defined tolerance.
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-30


(2) The information system produces a system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail composed of audit
records in a standardized format.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Audit information normalized to a common standard
promotes interoperability and exchange of such information between dissimilar devices and
information systems. This facilitates an audit system that produces event information that can
be more readily analyzed and correlated. System log records and audit records compliant
with the Common Event Expression (CEE) are examples of standard formats for audit
records. If individual logging mechanisms within the information system do not conform to a
standardized format, the system may convert individual audit records into a standardized
format when compiling the system-wide audit trail.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW AU-12 MOD AU-12 HIGH AU-12 (1)
AU-13 MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Control: The organization monitors open source information for evidence of unauthorized
exfiltration or disclosure of organizational information [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
AU-14 SESSION AUDIT
Control: The information system provides the capability to:
a. Capture/record and log all content related to a user session; and
b. Remotely view/hear all content related to an established user session in real time.
Supplemental Guidance: Session auditing activities are developed, integrated, and used in
consultation with legal counsel in accordance with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders,
directives, policies, or regulations.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system initiates session audits at system start-up.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
APPENDIX F-AU PAGE F-31


FAMILY: SECURITY ASSESSMENT AND AUTHORIZATION CLASS: MANAGEMENT
CA-1 SECURITY ASSESSMENT AND AUTHORIZATION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. Formal, documented security assessment and authorization policies that address purpose,
scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational
entities, and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the security assessment
and authorization policies and associated security assessment and authorization controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the security assessment and authorization family. The policies and procedures are consistent
with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The security assessment/authorization policies can
be included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. Security
assessment/authorization procedures can be developed for the security program in general and for
a particular information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy is a
key factor in the development of the security assessment and authorization policy. Related
control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-37, 800-53A, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CA-1 MOD CA-1 HIGH CA-1
CA-2 SECURITY ASSESSMENTS
Control: The organization:
a. Develops a security assessment plan that describes the scope of the assessment including:
- Security controls and control enhancements under assessment;
- Assessment procedures to be used to determine security control effectiveness; and
- Assessment environment, assessment team, and assessment roles and responsibilities;
b. Assesses the security controls in the information system [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] to determine the extent to which the controls are implemented correctly, operating
as intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security
requirements for the system;
c. Produces a security assessment report that documents the results of the assessment; and
d. Provides the results of the security control assessment, in writing, to the authorizing official or
authorizing official designated representative.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization assesses the security controls in an information system as
part of: (i) security authorization or reauthorization; (ii) meeting the FISMA requirement for
annual assessments; (iii) continuous monitoring; and (iv) testing/evaluation of the information
system as part of the system development life cycle process. The assessment report documents the
assessment results in sufficient detail as deemed necessary by the organization, to determine the
APPENDIX F-CA PAGE F-32


accuracy and completeness of the report and whether the security controls are implemented
correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the
security requirements of the information system. The FISMA requirement for (at least) annual
security control assessments should not be interpreted by organizations as adding additional
assessment requirements to those requirements already in place in the security authorization
process. To satisfy the FISMA annual assessment requirement, organizations can draw upon the
security control assessment results from any of the following sources, including but not limited to:
(i) assessments conducted as part of an information system authorization or reauthorization
process; (ii) continuous monitoring (see CA-7); or (iii) testing and evaluation of an information
system as part of the ongoing system development life cycle (provided that the testing and
evaluation results are current and relevant to the determination of security control effectiveness).
Existing security control assessment results are reused to the extent that they are still valid and are
supplemented with additional assessments as needed.
Subsequent to the initial authorization of the information system and in accordance with OMB
policy, the organization assesses a subset of the security controls annually during continuous
monitoring. The organization establishes the security control selection criteria and subsequently
selects a subset of the security controls within the information system and its environment of
operation for assessment. Those security controls that are the most volatile (i.e., controls most
affected by ongoing changes to the information system or its environment of operation) or deemed
critical by the organization to protecting organizational operations and assets, individuals, other
organizations, and the Nation are assessed more frequently in accordance with an organizational
assessment of risk. All other controls are assessed at least once during the information system’s
three-year authorization cycle. The organization can use the current year’s assessment results
from any of the above sources to meet the FISMA annual assessment requirement provided that
the results are current, valid, and relevant to determining security control effectiveness. External
audits (e.g., audits conducted by external entities such as regulatory agencies) are outside the
scope of this control. Related controls: CA-6, CA-7, PM-9, SA-11.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs an independent assessor or assessment team to conduct an
assessment of the security controls in the information system.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An independent assessor or assessment team is any
individual or group capable of conducting an impartial assessment of an organizational
information system. Impartiality implies that the assessors are free from any perceived or
actual conflicts of interest with respect to the developmental, operational, and/or management
chain associated with the information system or to the determination of security control
effectiveness. Independent security assessment services can be obtained from other elements
within the organization or can be contracted to a public or private sector entity outside of the
organization. Contracted assessment services are considered independent if the information
system owner is not directly involved in the contracting process or cannot unduly influence
the impartiality of the assessor or assessment team conducting the assessment of the security
controls in the information system. The authorizing official determines the required level of
assessor independence based on the security categorization of the information system and/or
the ultimate risk to organizational operations and assets, and to individuals. The authorizing
official determines if the level of assessor independence is sufficient to provide confidence
that the assessment results produced are sound and can be used to make a credible, risk-based
decision. In special situations, for example when the organization that owns the information
system is small or the organizational structure requires that the assessment be accomplished
by individuals that are in the developmental, operational, and/or management chain of the
system owner, independence in the assessment process can be achieved by ensuring that the
assessment results are carefully reviewed and analyzed by an independent team of experts to
validate the completeness, accuracy, integrity, and reliability of the results.
(2) The organization includes as part of security control assessments, [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency], [Selection: announced; unannounced], [Selection: in-depth monitoring;
malicious user testing; penetration testing; red team exercises; [Assignment: organization-defined
other forms of security testing]].
APPENDIX F-CA PAGE F-33


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Penetration testing exercises both physical and technical
security controls. A standard method for penetration testing consists of: (i) pretest analysis
based on full knowledge of the target system; (ii) pretest identification of potential
vulnerabilities based on pretest analysis; and (iii) testing designed to determine exploitability
of identified vulnerabilities. Detailed rules of engagement are agreed upon by all parties
before the commencement of any penetration testing scenario. These rules of engagement are
correlated with the tools, techniques, and procedures that are anticipated to be employed by
threat-sources in carrying out attacks. An organizational assessment of risk guides the
decision on the level of independence required for penetration agents or penetration teams
conducting penetration testing. Red team exercises are conducted as a simulated adversarial
attempt to compromise organizational missions and/or business processes to provide a
comprehensive assessment of the security capability of the information system and
organization. While penetration testing may be laboratory-based testing, red team exercises
are intended to be more comprehensive in nature and reflect real-world conditions.
Information system monitoring, malicious user testing, penetration testing, red-team
exercises, and other forms of security testing (e.g., independent verification and validation)
are conducted to improve the readiness of the organization by exercising organizational
capabilities and indicating current performance levels as a means of focusing organizational
actions to improve the security state of the system and organization. Testing is conducted in
accordance with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations,
and standards. Testing methods are approved by authorizing officials in coordination with the
organization’s Risk Executive Function. Vulnerabilities uncovered during red team exercises
are incorporated into the vulnerability remediation process. Related controls: RA-5, SI-2.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-37, 800-53A, 800-115.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW CA-2 MOD CA-2 (1) HIGH CA-2 (1) (2)
CA-3 INFORMATION SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Control: The organization:
a. Authorizes connections from the information system to other information systems outside of
the authorization boundary through the use of Interconnection Security Agreements;
b. Documents, for each connection, the interface characteristics, security requirements, and the
nature of the information communicated; and
c. Monitors the information system connections on an ongoing basis verifying enforcement of
security requirements.
Supplemental Guidance: This control applies to dedicated connections between information systems
and does not apply to transitory, user-controlled connections such as email and website browsing.
The organization carefully considers the risks that may be introduced when information systems
are connected to other systems with different security requirements and security controls, both
within the organization and external to the organization. Authorizing officials determine the risk
associated with each connection and the appropriate controls employed. If the interconnecting
systems have the same authorizing official, an Interconnection Security Agreement is not required.
Rather, the interface characteristics between the interconnecting information systems are described
in the security plans for the respective systems. If the interconnecting systems have different
authorizing officials but the authorizing officials are in the same organization, the organization
determines whether an Interconnection Security Agreement is required, or alternatively, the
interface characteristics between systems are described in the security plans of the respective
systems. Instead of developing an Interconnection Security Agreement, organizations may choose
to incorporate this information into a formal contract, especially if the interconnection is to be
APPENDIX F-CA PAGE F-34


established between a federal agency and a nonfederal (private sector) organization. In every case,
documenting the interface characteristics is required, yet the formality and approval process vary
considerably even though all accomplish the same fundamental objective of managing the risk
being incurred by the interconnection of the information systems. Risk considerations also
include information systems sharing the same networks. Information systems may be identified
and authenticated as devices in accordance with IA-3. Related controls: AC-4, IA-3, SC-7, SA-9.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization prohibits the direct connection of an unclassified, national security system to an
external network.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An external network is a network that is not controlled by
the organization (e.g., the Internet). No direct connection means that an information system
cannot connect to an external network without the use of an approved boundary protection
device (e.g., firewall) that mediates the communication between the system and the network.
(2) The organization prohibits the direct connection of a classified, national security system to an
external network.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An external network is a network that is not controlled by
the organization (e.g., the Internet). No direct connection means that an information system
cannot connect to an external network without the use of an approved boundary protection
device (e.g., firewall) that mediates the communication between the system and the network.
In addition, the approved boundary protection device (typically a managed interface/crossdomain
system), provides information flow enforcement from the information system to the
external network consistent with AC-4.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800-47.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CA-3 MOD CA-3 HIGH CA-3
CA-4 SECURITY CERTIFICATION
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CA-2].
CA-5 PLAN OF ACTION AND MILESTONES
Control: The organization:
a. Develops a plan of action and milestones for the information system to document the
organization’s planned remedial actions to correct weaknesses or deficiencies noted during
the assessment of the security controls and to reduce or eliminate known vulnerabilities in the
system; and
b. Updates existing plan of action and milestones [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]
based on the findings from security controls assessments, security impact analyses, and
continuous monitoring activities.
Supplemental Guidance: The plan of action and milestones is a key document in the security
authorization package and is subject to federal reporting requirements established by OMB.
Related control: PM-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to help ensure that the plan of action and
milestones for the information system is accurate, up to date, and readily available.
References: OMB Memorandum 02-01; NIST Special Publication 800-37.
APPENDIX F-CA PAGE F-35


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW CA-5 MOD CA-5 HIGH CA-5
CA-6 SECURITY AUTHORIZATION
Control: The organization:
a. Assigns a senior-level executive or manager to the role of authorizing official for the
information system;
b. Ensures that the authorizing official authorizes the information system for processing before
commencing operations; and
c. Updates the security authorization [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: Security authorization is the official management decision, conveyed
through the authorization decision document, given by a senior organizational official or executive
(i.e., authorizing official) to authorize operation of an information system and to explicitly accept
the risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation
based on the implementation of an agreed-upon set of security controls. Authorizing officials
typically have budgetary oversight for information systems or are responsible for the mission or
business operations supported by the systems. Security authorization is an inherently federal
responsibility and therefore, authorizing officials must be federal employees. Through the security
authorization process, authorizing officials are accountable for the security risks associated with
information system operations. Accordingly, authorizing officials are in management positions
with a level of authority commensurate with understanding and accepting such information
system-related security risks. Through the employment of a comprehensive continuous
monitoring process, the critical information contained in the authorization package (i.e., the
security plan (including risk assessment), the security assessment report, and the plan of action
and milestones) is updated on an ongoing basis, providing the authorizing official and the
information system owner with an up-to-date status of the security state of the information system.
To reduce the administrative cost of security reauthorization, the authorizing official uses the
results of the continuous monitoring process to the maximum extent possible as the basis for
rendering a reauthorization decision. OMB policy requires that federal information systems are
reauthorized at least every three years or when there is a significant change to the system. The
organization defines what constitutes a significant change to the information system. Related
controls: CA-2, CA-7, PM-9, PM-10.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: OMB Circular A-130; NIST Special Publication 800-37.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW CA-6 MOD CA-6 HIGH CA-6
CA-7 CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: The organization establishes a continuous monitoring strategy and implements a
continuous monitoring program that includes:
a. A configuration management process for the information system and its constituent
components;
b. A determination of the security impact of changes to the information system and environment
of operation;
APPENDIX F-CA PAGE F-36MISSION/BUSINESS PROCESS DEFINITION 


c. Ongoing security control assessments in accordance with the organizational continuous
monitoring strategy; and
d. Reporting the security state of the information system to appropriate organizational officials
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: A continuous monitoring program allows an organization to maintain the
security authorization of an information system over time in a highly dynamic environment of
operation with changing threats, vulnerabilities, technologies, and missions/business processes.
Continuous monitoring of security controls using automated support tools facilitates near real-time
risk management and promotes organizational situational awareness with regard to the security
state of the information system. The implementation of a continuous monitoring program results
in ongoing updates to the security plan, the security assessment report, and the plan of action and
milestones, the three principal documents in the security authorization package. A rigorous and
well executed continuous monitoring program significantly reduces the level of effort required for
the reauthorization of the information system. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in
accordance with the security categorization of the information system. Related controls: CA-2,
CA-5, CA-6, CM-3, CM-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs an independent assessor or assessment team to monitor the security
controls in the information system on an ongoing basis.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The organization can extend and maximize the value of
the ongoing assessment of security controls during the continuous monitoring process by
requiring an independent assessor or team to assess all of the security controls during the
information system’s three-year authorization cycle. See supplemental guidance for CA-2,
enhancement (1), for further information on assessor independence. Related controls: CA-2,
CA-5, CA-6, CM-4.
(2) The organization plans, schedules, and conducts assessments [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency], [Selection: announced; unannounced], [Selection: in-depth monitoring; malicious user
testing; penetration testing; red team exercises; [Assignment: organization-defined other forms of
security assessment]] to ensure compliance with all vulnerability mitigation procedures.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of vulnerability mitigation procedures are
contained in Information Assurance Vulnerability Alerts. Testing is intended to ensure that
the information system continues to provide adequate security against constantly evolving
threats and vulnerabilities. Conformance testing also provides independent validation. See
supplemental guidance for CA-2, enhancement (2) for further information on malicious user
testing, penetration testing, red-team exercises, and other forms of security testing. Related
control: CA-2.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-37, 800-53A; US-CERT Technical Cyber Security
Alerts; DOD Information Assurance Vulnerability Alerts.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW CA-7 MOD CA-7 HIGH CA-7
APPENDIX F-CA PAGE F-37


FAMILY: CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT CLASS: OPERATIONAL
CM-1 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented configuration management policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the configuration
management policy and associated configuration management controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the configuration management family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable
federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The configuration management policy can be included as part of the
general information security policy for the organization. Configuration management procedures
can be developed for the security program in general and for a particular information system,
when required. The organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of
the configuration management policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CM-1 MOD CM-1 HIGH CM-1
CM-2 BASELINE CONFIGURATION
Control: The organization develops, documents, and maintains under configuration control, a
current baseline configuration of the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: This control establishes a baseline configuration for the information system
and its constituent components including communications and connectivity-related aspects of the
system. The baseline configuration provides information about the components of an information
system (e.g., the standard software load for a workstation, server, network component, or mobile
device including operating system/installed applications with current version numbers and patch
information), network topology, and the logical placement of the component within the system
architecture. The baseline configuration is a documented, up-to-date specification to which the
information system is built. Maintaining the baseline configuration involves creating new
baselines as the information system changes over time. The baseline configuration of the
information system is consistent with the organization’s enterprise architecture. Related controls:
CM-3, CM-6, CM-8, CM-9.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization reviews and updates the baseline configuration of the information system:
(a) [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
(b) When required due to [Assignment organization-defined circumstances]; and
(c) As an integral part of information system component installations and upgrades.
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to maintain an up-to-date, complete, accurate,
and readily available baseline configuration of the information system.
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-38


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Software inventory tools are examples of automated
mechanisms that help organizations maintain consistent baseline configurations for
information systems. Software inventory tools can be deployed for each operating system in
use within the organization (e.g., on workstations, servers, network components, mobile
devices) and used to track operating system version numbers, applications and types of
software installed on the operating systems, and current patch levels. Software inventory
tools can also scan information systems for unauthorized software to validate organizationdefined
lists of authorized and unauthorized software programs.
(3) The organization retains older versions of baseline configurations as deemed necessary to support
rollback.
(4) The organization:
(a) Develops and maintains [Assignment: organization-defined list of software programs not
authorized to execute on the information system]; and
(b) Employs an allow-all, deny-by-exception authorization policy to identify software allowed to
execute on the information system.
(5) The organization:
(a) Develops and maintains [Assignment: organization-defined list of software programs
authorized to execute on the information system]; and
(b) Employs a deny-all, permit-by-exception authorization policy to identify software allowed to
execute on the information system.
(6) The organization maintains a baseline configuration for development and test environments that is
managed separately from the operational baseline configuration.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-128.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CM-2 MOD CM-2 (1) (3) (4) HIGH CM-2 (1) (2) (3) (5) (6)
CM-3 CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL
Control: The organization:
a. Determines the types of changes to the information system that are configuration controlled;
b. Approves configuration-controlled changes to the system with explicit consideration for
security impact analyses;
c. Documents approved configuration-controlled changes to the system;
d. Retains and reviews records of configuration-controlled changes to the system;
e. Audits activities associated with configuration-controlled changes to the system; and
f. Coordinates and provides oversight for configuration change control activities through
[Assignment: organization-defined configuration change control element (e.g., committee,
board] that convenes [Selection: (one or more): [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency]; [Assignment: organization-defined configuration change conditions]].
Supplemental Guidance: The organization determines the types of changes to the information system
that are configuration controlled. Configuration change control for the information system
involves the systematic proposal, justification, implementation, test/evaluation, review, and
disposition of changes to the system, including upgrades and modifications. Configuration change
control includes changes to components of the information system, changes to the configuration
settings for information technology products (e.g., operating systems, applications, firewalls,
routers), emergency changes, and changes to remediate flaws. A typical organizational process for
managing configuration changes to the information system includes, for example, a chartered
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-39


Configuration Control Board that approves proposed changes to the system. Auditing of changes
refers to changes in activity before and after a change is made to the information system and the
auditing activities required to implement the change. Related controls: CM-4, CM-5, CM-6, SI-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to:
(a) Document proposed changes to the information system;
(b) Notify designated approval authorities;
(c) Highlight approvals that have not been received by [Assignment: organization-defined time
period];
(d) Inhibit change until designated approvals are received; and
(e) Document completed changes to the information system.
(2) The organization tests, validates, and documents changes to the information system before
implementing the changes on the operational system.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The organization ensures that testing does not interfere
with information system operations. The individual/group conducting the tests understands
the organizational information security policies and procedures, the information system
security policies and procedures, and the specific health, safety, and environmental risks
associated with a particular facility and/or process. An operational system may need to be
taken off-line, or replicated to the extent feasible, before testing can be conducted. If an
information system must be taken off-line for testing, the tests are scheduled to occur during
planned system outages whenever possible. In situations where the organization cannot
conduct testing of an operational system, the organization employs compensating controls
(e.g., providing a replicated system to conduct testing) in accordance with the general
tailoring guidance.
(3) The organization employs automated mechanisms to implement changes to the current
information system baseline and deploys the updated baseline across the installed base.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: CM-2, CM-6.
(4) The organization requires an information security representative to be a member of the
[Assignment: organization-defined configuration change control element (e.g., committee, board)].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Information security representatives can include, for
example, information system security officers or information system security managers. The
configuration change control element in this control enhancement is consistent with the
change control element defined by the organization in CM-3.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-128.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD CM-3 (2) HIGH CM-3 (1) (2)
CM-4 SECURITY IMPACT ANALYSIS
Control: The organization analyzes changes to the information system to determine potential
security impacts prior to change implementation.
Supplemental Guidance: Security impact analyses are conducted by organizational personnel with
information security responsibilities, including for example, Information System Administrators,
Information System Security Officers, Information System Security Managers, and Information
System Security Engineers. Individuals conducting security impact analyses have the appropriate
skills and technical expertise to analyze the changes to information systems and the associated
security ramifications. Security impact analysis may include, for example, reviewing information
system documentation such as the security plan to understand how specific security controls are
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-40


implemented within the system and how the changes might affect the controls. Security impact
analysis may also include an assessment of risk to understand the impact of the changes and to
determine if additional security controls are required. Security impact analysis is scaled in
accordance with the security categorization of the information system. Related controls: CA-2,
CA-7, CM-3, CM-9, SI-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization analyzes new software in a separate test environment before installation in an
operational environment, looking for security impacts due to flaws, weaknesses, incompatibility, or
intentional malice.
(2) The organization, after the information system is changed, checks the security functions to verify
that the functions are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired
outcome with regard to meeting the security requirements for the system.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Changes include information system upgrades and
modifications.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-128.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW CM-4 MOD CM-4 HIGH CM-4 (1)
CM-5 ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE
Control: The organization defines, documents, approves, and enforces physical and logical access
restrictions associated with changes to the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: Any changes to the hardware, software, and/or firmware components of the
information system can potentially have significant effects on the overall security of the system.
Accordingly, only qualified and authorized individuals are allowed to obtain access to information
system components for purposes of initiating changes, including upgrades and modifications.
Additionally, maintaining records of access is essential for ensuring that configuration change
control is being implemented as intended and for supporting after-the-fact actions should the
organization become aware of an unauthorized change to the information system. Access
restrictions for change also include software libraries. Examples of access restrictions include, for
example, physical and logical access controls (see AC-3 and PE-3), workflow automation, media
libraries, abstract layers (e.g., changes are implemented into a third-party interface rather than
directly into the information system component), and change windows (e.g., changes occur only
during specified times, making unauthorized changes outside the window easy to discover). Some
or all of the enforcement mechanisms and processes necessary to implement this security control
are included in other controls. For measures implemented in other controls, this control provides
information to be used in the implementation of the other controls to cover specific needs related
to enforcing authorizations to make changes to the information system, auditing changes, and
retaining and review records of changes. Related controls: AC-3, AC-6, PE-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to enforce access restrictions and support
auditing of the enforcement actions.
(2) The organization conducts audits of information system changes [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency] and when indications so warrant to determine whether unauthorized changes
have occurred.
(3) The information system prevents the installation of [Assignment: organization-defined critical
software programs] that are not signed with a certificate that is recognized and approved by the
organization.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Critical software programs and/or modules include, for
example, patches, service packs, and where applicable, device drivers.
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-41


(4) The organization enforces a two-person rule for changes to [Assignment: organization-defined
information system components and system-level information].
(5) The organization:
(a) Limits information system developer/integrator privileges to change hardware, software, and
firmware components and system information directly within a production environment; and
(b) Reviews and reevaluates information system developer/integrator privileges [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency].
(6) The organization limits privileges to change software resident within software libraries (including
privileged programs).
(7) The information system automatically implements [Assignment: organization-defined safeguards
and countermeasures] if security functions (or mechanisms) are changed inappropriately.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The information system reacts automatically when
inappropriate and/or unauthorized modifications have occurred to security functions or
mechanisms. Automatic implementation of safeguards and countermeasures includes, for
example, reversing the change, halting the information system or triggering an audit alert
when an unauthorized modification to a critical security file occurs.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD CM-5 HIGH CM-5 (1) (2) (3)
CM-6 CONFIGURATION SETTINGS
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes and documents mandatory configuration settings for information technology
products employed within the information system using [Assignment: organization-defined
security configuration checklists] that reflect the most restrictive mode consistent with
operational requirements;
b. Implements the configuration settings;
c. Identifies, documents, and approves exceptions from the mandatory configuration settings for
individual components within the information system based on explicit operational
requirements; and
d. Monitors and controls changes to the configuration settings in accordance with organizational
policies and procedures.
Supplemental Guidance: Configuration settings are the configurable security-related parameters of
information technology products that are part of the information system. Security-related
parameters are those parameters impacting the security state of the system including parameters
related to meeting other security control requirements. Security-related parameters include, for
example, registry settings; account, file, and directory settings (i.e., permissions); and settings for
services, ports, protocols, and remote connections. Organizations establish organization-wide
mandatory configuration settings from which the settings for a given information system are
derived. A security configuration checklist (sometimes referred to as a lockdown guide, hardening
guide, security guide, security technical implementation guide [STIG], or benchmark) is a series of
instructions or procedures for configuring an information system component to meet operational
requirements. Checklists can be developed by information technology developers and vendors,
consortia, academia, industry, federal agencies (and other government organizations), and others
in the public and private sectors. An example of a security configuration checklist is the Federal
Desktop Core Configuration (FDCC) which potentially affects the implementation of CM-6 and
other controls such as AC-19 and CM-7. The Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) and
defined standards within the protocol (e.g., Common Configuration Enumeration) provide an
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-42


effective method to uniquely identify, track, and control configuration settings. OMB establishes
federal policy on configuration requirements for federal information systems. Related controls:
CM-2, CM-3, SI-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to centrally manage, apply, and verify
configuration settings.
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to respond to unauthorized changes to
[Assignment: organization-defined configuration settings].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Responses to unauthorized changes to configuration
settings can include, for example, alerting designated organizational personnel, restoring
mandatory/organization-defined configuration settings, or in the extreme case, halting
affected information system processing.
(3) The organization incorporates detection of unauthorized, security-relevant configuration changes
into the organization’s incident response capability to ensure that such detected events are
tracked, monitored, corrected, and available for historical purposes.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: IR-4, IR-5.
(4) The information system (including modifications to the baseline configuration) demonstrates
conformance to security configuration guidance (i.e., security checklists), prior to being introduced
into a production environment.
References: OMB Memoranda 07-11, 07-18, 08-22; NIST Special Publications 800-70, 800-128;
Web: NVD.NIST.GOV; WWW.NSA.GOV.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CM-6 MOD CM-6 (3) HIGH CM-6 (1) (2) (3)
CM-7 LEAST FUNCTIONALITY
Control: The organization configures the information system to provide only essential capabilities
and specifically prohibits or restricts the use of the following functions, ports, protocols, and/or
services: [Assignment: organization-defined list of prohibited or restricted functions, ports,
protocols, and/or services].
Supplemental Guidance: Information systems are capable of providing a wide variety of functions
and services. Some of the functions and services, provided by default, may not be necessary to
support essential organizational operations (e.g., key missions, functions). Additionally, it is
sometimes convenient to provide multiple services from a single component of an information
system, but doing so increases risk over limiting the services provided by any one component.
Where feasible, organizations limit component functionality to a single function per device (e.g.,
email server or web server, not both). The functions and services provided by organizational
information systems, or individual components of information systems, are carefully reviewed to
determine which functions and services are candidates for elimination (e.g., Voice Over Internet
Protocol, Instant Messaging, auto-execute, file sharing). Organizations consider disabling unused
or unnecessary physical and logical ports and protocols (e.g., Universal Serial Bus [USB], File
Transfer Protocol [FTP], Internet Protocol Version 6 [IPv6], Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
[HTTP]) on information system components to prevent unauthorized connection of devices,
unauthorized transfer of information, or unauthorized tunneling. Organizations can utilize
network scanning tools, intrusion detection and prevention systems, and end-point protections
such as firewalls and host-based intrusion detection systems to identify and prevent the use of
prohibited functions, ports, protocols, and services. Related control: RA-5.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization reviews the information system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to
identify and eliminate unnecessary functions, ports, protocols, and/or services.
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-43


(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to prevent program execution in accordance
with [Selection (one or more): list of authorized software programs; list of unauthorized software
programs; rules authorizing the terms and conditions of software program usage].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: CM-2.
(3) The organization ensures compliance with [Assignment: organization-defined registration
requirements for ports, protocols, and services].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organizations use the registration process to manage,
track, and provide oversight for information systems and implemented functionality.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CM-7 MOD CM-7 (1) HIGH CM-7 (1) (2)
CM-8 INFORMATION SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY
Control: The organization develops, documents, and maintains an inventory of information system
components that:
a. Accurately reflects the current information system;
b. Is consistent with the authorization boundary of the information system;
c. Is at the level of granularity deemed necessary for tracking and reporting;
d. Includes [Assignment: organization-defined information deemed necessary to achieve
effective property accountability]; and
e. Is available for review and audit by designated organizational officials.
Supplemental Guidance: Information deemed to be necessary by the organization to achieve
effective property accountability can include, for example, hardware inventory specifications
(manufacturer, type, model, serial number, physical location), software license information,
information system/component owner, and for a networked component/device, the machine name
and network address. Related controls: CM-2, CM-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization updates the inventory of information system components as an integral part of
component installations, removals, and information system updates.
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to help maintain an up-to-date, complete,
accurate, and readily available inventory of information system components.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organizations maintain the information system inventory
to the extent feasible. Virtual machines, for example, can be difficult to monitor because they
are not visible to the network when not in use. In such cases, the intent of this control
enhancement is to maintain as up-to-date, complete, and accurate an inventory as is
reasonable.
(3) The organization:
(a) Employs automated mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to detect the
addition of unauthorized components/devices into the information system; and
(b) Disables network access by such components/devices or notifies designated organizational
officials.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is applied in addition to the
monitoring for unauthorized remote connections in AC-17 and for unauthorized mobile
devices in AC-19. The monitoring for unauthorized components/devices on information
system networks may be accomplished on an ongoing basis or by the periodic scanning of
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-44


organizational networks for that purpose. Automated mechanisms can be implemented within
the information system and/or in another separate information system or device. Related
controls: AC-17, AC-19.
(4) The organization includes in property accountability information for information system
components, a means for identifying by [Selection (one or more): name; position; role] individuals
responsible for administering those components.
(5) The organization verifies that all components within the authorization boundary of the information
system are either inventoried as a part of the system or recognized by another system as a
component within that system.
(6) The organization includes assessed component configurations and any approved deviations to
current deployed configurations in the information system component inventory.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement focuses on the configuration
settings established by the organization for its information system components, the specific
information system components that have been assessed to determine compliance with the
required configuration settings, and any approved deviations from established configuration
settings in the deployed information system components. Related controls: CM-2, CM-6.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-128.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CM-8 MOD CM-8 (1) (5) HIGH CM-8 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
CM-9 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT PLAN
Control: The organization develops, documents, and implements a configuration management plan
for the information system that:
a. Addresses roles, responsibilities, and configuration management processes and procedures;
b. Defines the configuration items for the information system and when in the system
development life cycle the configuration items are placed under configuration management;
and
c. Establishes the means for identifying configuration items throughout the system development
life cycle and a process for managing the configuration of the configuration items.
Supplemental Guidance: Configuration items are the information system items (hardware, software,
firmware, and documentation) to be configuration managed. The configuration management plan
satisfies the requirements in the organization’s configuration management policy while being
tailored to the individual information system. The configuration management plan defines
detailed processes and procedures for how configuration management is used to support system
development life cycle activities at the information system level. The plan describes how to move
a change through the change management process, how configuration settings and configuration
baselines are updated, how the information system component inventory is maintained, how
development, test, and operational environments are controlled, and finally, how documents are
developed, released, and updated. The configuration management approval process includes
designation of key management stakeholders that are responsible for reviewing and approving
proposed changes to the information system, and security personnel that would conduct an impact
analysis prior to the implementation of any changes to the system. Related control: SA-10.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization assigns responsibility for developing the configuration management process to
organizational personnel that are not directly involved in system development.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: In the absence of a dedicated configuration management
team, the system integrator may be tasked with developing the configuration management
process.
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-45


References: NIST Special Publication 800-128.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD CM-9 HIGH CM-9
APPENDIX F-CM PAGE F-46


FAMILY: CONTINGENCY PLANNING CLASS: OPERATIONAL
CP-1 CONTINGENCY PLANNING POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented contingency planning policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the contingency planning
policy and associated contingency planning controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the contingency planning family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable
federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The contingency planning policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Contingency planning procedures can be
developed for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when
required. The organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the
contingency planning policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: Federal Continuity Directive 1; NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-34, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CP-1 MOD CP-1 HIGH CP-1
CP-2 CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control: The organization:
a. Develops a contingency plan for the information system that:
- Identifies essential missions and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
- Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
- Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
- Addresses maintaining essential missions and business functions despite an information
system disruption, compromise, or failure;
- Addresses eventual, full information system restoration without deterioration of the
security measures originally planned and implemented; and
- Is reviewed and approved by designated officials within the organization;
b. Distributes copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined list of key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinates contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Reviews the contingency plan for the information system [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency];
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-47


e. Revises the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, information system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan implementation,
execution, or testing; and
f. Communicates contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined list of key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements].
Supplemental Guidance: Contingency planning for information systems is part of an overall
organizational program for achieving continuity of operations for mission/business operations.
Contingency planning addresses both information system restoration and implementation of
alternative mission/business processes when systems are compromised. Information system
recovery objectives are consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies,
standards, or regulations. In addition to information system availability, contingency plans also
address other security-related events resulting in a reduction in mission/business effectiveness,
such as malicious attacks compromising the confidentiality or integrity of the information system.
Examples of actions to call out in contingency plans include, for example, graceful degradation,
information system shutdown, fall back to a manual mode, alternate information flows, or
operating in a mode that is reserved solely for when the system is under attack. Related controls:
AC-14, CP-6, CP-7, CP-8, IR-4, PM-8, PM-11.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization coordinates contingency plan development with organizational elements
responsible for related plans.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of related plans include Business Continuity
Plan, Disaster Recovery Plan, Continuity of Operations Plan, Crisis Communications Plan,
Critical Infrastructure Plan, Cyber Incident Response Plan, and Occupant Emergency Plan.
(2) The organization conducts capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information
processing, telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency
operations.
(3) The organization plans for the resumption of essential missions and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
(4) The organization plans for the full resumption of missions and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
(5) The organization plans for the continuance of essential missions and business functions with little
or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full information system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
(6) The organization provides for the transfer of all essential missions and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with little or no loss of operational continuity and
sustains that continuity through restoration to primary processing and/or storage sites.
References: Federal Continuity Directive 1; NIST Special Publication 800-34.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CP-2 MOD CP-2 (1) HIGH CP-2 (1) (2) (3)
CP-3 CONTINGENCY TRAINING
Control: The organization trains personnel in their contingency roles and responsibilities with
respect to the information system and provides refresher training [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization incorporates simulated events into contingency training to facilitate effective
response by personnel in crisis situations.
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-48


(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to provide a more thorough and realistic
training environment.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-16, 800-50.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW CP-3 MOD CP-3 HIGH CP-3 (1)
CP-4 CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING AND EXERCISES
Control: The organization:
a. Tests and/or exercises the contingency plan for the information system [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] using [Assignment: organization-defined tests and/or
exercises] to determine the plan’s effectiveness and the organization’s readiness to execute
the plan; and
b. Reviews the contingency plan test/exercise results and initiates corrective actions.
Supplemental Guidance: There are several methods for testing and/or exercising contingency plans
to identify potential weaknesses (e.g., checklist, walk-through/tabletop, simulation: parallel, full
interrupt). Contingency plan testing and/or exercises include a determination of the effects on
organizational operations and assets (e.g., reduction in mission capability) and individuals arising
due to contingency operations in accordance with the plan.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization coordinates contingency plan testing and/or exercises with organizational
elements responsible for related plans.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of related plans include Business Continuity
Plan, Disaster Recovery Plan, Continuity of Operations Plan, Crisis Communications Plan,
Critical Infrastructure Plan, Cyber Incident Response Plan, and Occupant Emergency Plan.
(2) The organization tests/exercises the contingency plan at the alternate processing site to familiarize
contingency personnel with the facility and available resources and to evaluate the site’s
capabilities to support contingency operations.
(3) The organization employs automated mechanisms to more thoroughly and effectively test/exercise
the contingency plan by providing more complete coverage of contingency issues, selecting more
realistic test/exercise scenarios and environments, and more effectively stressing the information
system and supported missions.
(4) The organization includes a full recovery and reconstitution of the information system to a known
state as part of contingency plan testing.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: CP-10, SC-24.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-34, 800-84.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW CP-4 MOD CP-4 (1) HIGH CP-4 (1) (2) (4)
CP-5 CONTINGENCY PLAN UPDATE
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CP-2].
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-49


CP-6 ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE
Control: The organization establishes an alternate storage site including necessary agreements to
permit the storage and recovery of information system backup information.
Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: CP-2, CP-9, MP-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization identifies an alternate storage site that is separated from the primary storage site
so as not to be susceptible to the same hazards.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Hazards of concern to the organization are typically
defined in an organizational assessment of risk.
(2) The organization configures the alternate storage site to facilitate recovery operations in
accordance with recovery time and recovery point objectives.
(3) The organization identifies potential accessibility problems to the alternate storage site in the
event of an area-wide disruption or disaster and outlines explicit mitigation actions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Explicit mitigation actions include, for example,
duplicating backup information at another alternate storage site if access to the first alternate
site is hindered; or, if electronic accessibility to the alternate site is disrupted, planning for
physical access to retrieve backup information.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-34.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD CP-6 (1) (3) HIGH CP-6 (1) (2) (3)
CP-7 ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes an alternate processing site including necessary agreements to permit the
resumption of information system operations for essential missions and business functions
within [Assignment: organization-defined time period consistent with recovery time
objectives] when the primary processing capabilities are unavailable; and
b. Ensures that equipment and supplies required to resume operations are available at the
alternate site or contracts are in place to support delivery to the site in time to support the
organization-defined time period for resumption.
Supplemental Guidance: Related control: CP-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization identifies an alternate processing site that is separated from the primary
processing site so as not to be susceptible to the same hazards.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Hazards that might affect the information system are
typically defined in the risk assessment.
(2) The organization identifies potential accessibility problems to the alternate processing site in the
event of an area-wide disruption or disaster and outlines explicit mitigation actions.
(3) The organization develops alternate processing site agreements that contain priority-of-service
provisions in accordance with the organization’s availability requirements.
(4) The organization configures the alternate processing site so that it is ready to be used as the
operational site supporting essential missions and business functions.
(5) The organization ensures that the alternate processing site provides information security
measures equivalent to that of the primary site.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-34.
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-50


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD CP-7 (1) (2) (3) (5) HIGH CP-7 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
CP-8 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Control: The organization establishes alternate telecommunications services including necessary
agreements to permit the resumption of information system operations for essential missions and
business functions within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the primary
telecommunications capabilities are unavailable.
Supplemental Guidance: Related control: CP-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization:
(a) Develops primary and alternate telecommunications service agreements that contain priorityof-
service provisions in accordance with the organization’s availability requirements; and
(b) Requests Telecommunications Service Priority for all telecommunications services used for
national security emergency preparedness in the event that the primary and/or alternate
telecommunications services are provided by a common carrier.
(2) The organization obtains alternate telecommunications services with consideration for reducing
the likelihood of sharing a single point of failure with primary telecommunications services.
(3) The organization obtains alternate telecommunications service providers that are separated from
primary service providers so as not to be susceptible to the same hazards.
(4) The organization requires primary and alternate telecommunications service providers to have
contingency plans.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-34; Web: TSP.NCS.GOV.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD CP-8 (1) (2) HIGH CP-8 (1) (2) (3) (4)
CP-9 INFORMATION SYSTEM BACKUP
Control: The organization:
a. Conducts backups of user-level information contained in the information system [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency consistent with recovery time and recovery point objectives];
b. Conducts backups of system-level information contained in the information system
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency consistent with recovery time and recovery
point objectives];
c. Conducts backups of information system documentation including security-related
documentation [Assignment: organization-defined frequency consistent with recovery time
and recovery point objectives]; and
d. Protects the confidentiality and integrity of backup information at the storage location.
Supplemental Guidance: System-level information includes, for example, system-state information,
operating system and application software, and licenses. Digital signatures and cryptographic
hashes are examples of mechanisms that can be employed by organizations to protect the integrity
of information system backups. An organizational assessment of risk guides the use of encryption
for protecting backup information. The protection of system backup information while in transit is
beyond the scope of this control. Related controls: CP-6, MP-4.
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-51


Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization tests backup information [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to verify
media reliability and information integrity.
(2) The organization uses a sample of backup information in the restoration of selected information
system functions as part of contingency plan testing.
(3) The organization stores backup copies of the operating system and other critical information
system software, as well as copies of the information system inventory (including hardware,
software, and firmware components) in a separate facility or in a fire-rated container that is not
collocated with the operational system.
(4) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CP-9].
(5) The organization transfers information system backup information to the alternate storage site
[Assignment: organization-defined time period and transfer rate consistent with the recovery time
and recovery point objectives].
(6) The organization accomplishes information system backup by maintaining a redundant secondary
system, not collocated, that can be activated without loss of information or disruption to the
operation.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-34.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CP-9 MOD CP-9 (1) HIGH CP-9 (1) (2) (3)
CP-10 INFORMATION SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION
Control: The organization provides for the recovery and reconstitution of the information system to
a known state after a disruption, compromise, or failure.
Supplemental Guidance: Recovery is executing information system contingency plan activities to
restore essential missions and business functions. Reconstitution takes place following recovery
and includes activities for returning the information system to its original functional state before
contingency plan activation. Recovery and reconstitution procedures are based on organizational
priorities, established recovery point/time and reconstitution objectives, and appropriate metrics.
Reconstitution includes the deactivation of any interim information system capability that may
have been needed during recovery operations. Reconstitution also includes an assessment of the
fully restored information system capability, a potential system reauthorization and the necessary
activities to prepare the system against another disruption, compromise, or failure. Recovery and
reconstitution capabilities employed by the organization can be a combination of automated
mechanisms and manual procedures. Related controls: CA-2, CA-6, CA-7, SC-24.
Control Enhancements:
(1) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CP-4].
(2) The information system implements transaction recovery for systems that are transaction-based.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Database management systems and transaction processing
systems are examples of information systems that are transaction-based. Transaction rollback
and transaction journaling are examples of mechanisms supporting transaction recovery.
(3) The organization provides compensating security controls for [Assignment: organization-defined
circumstances that can inhibit recovery and reconstitution to a known state].
(4) The organization provides the capability to reimage information system components within
[Assignment: organization-defined restoration time-periods] from configuration-controlled and
integrity-protected disk images representing a secure, operational state for the components.
(5) The organization provides [Selection: real-time; near-real-time] [Assignment: organization-defined
failover capability for the information system].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of failover capability are incorporating
mirrored information system operations at an alternate processing site or periodic data
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-52


mirroring at regular intervals during a time period defined by the organization's recovery time
period.
(6) The organization protects backup and restoration hardware, firmware, and software.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Protection of backup and restoration hardware, firmware,
and software includes both physical and technical measures. Router tables, compilers, and
other security-relevant system software are examples of backup and restoration software.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-34.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW CP-10 MOD CP-10 (2) (3) HIGH CP-10 (2) (3) (4)
APPENDIX F-CP PAGE F-53


FAMILY: IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION CLASS: TECHNICAL
IA-1 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented identification and authentication policy that addresses purpose, scope,
roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities,
and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the identification and
authentication policy and associated identification and authentication controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the identification and authentication family. The policy and procedures are consistent with
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The identification and authentication policy can be
included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. Identification and
authentication procedures can be developed for the security program in general and for a particular
information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy is a key factor
in the development of the identification and authentication policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-63, 800-73, 800-76,
800-78, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-1 MOD IA-1 HIGH IA-1
IA-2 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)
Control: The information system uniquely identifies and authenticates organizational users (or
processes acting on behalf of organizational users).
Supplemental Guidance: Organizational users include organizational employees or individuals the
organization deems to have equivalent status of employees (e.g., contractors, guest researchers,
individuals from allied nations). Users are uniquely identified and authenticated for all accesses
other than those accesses explicitly identified and documented by the organization in AC-14.
Unique identification of individuals in group accounts (e.g., shared privilege accounts) may need
to be considered for detailed accountability of activity. Authentication of user identities is
accomplished through the use of passwords, tokens, biometrics, or in the case of multifactor
authentication, some combination thereof. Access to organizational information systems is
defined as either local or network. Local access is any access to an organizational information
system by a user (or process acting on behalf of a user) where such access is obtained by direct
connection without the use of a network. Network access is any access to an organizational
information system by a user (or process acting on behalf of a user) where such access is obtained
through a network connection. Remote access is a type of network access which involves
communication through an external network (e.g., the Internet). Internal networks include local
area networks, wide area networks, and virtual private networks that are under the control of the
organization. For a virtual private network (VPN), the VPN is considered an internal network if
the organization establishes the VPN connection between organization-controlled endpoints in a
manner that does not require the organization to depend on any external networks across which the
VPN transits to protect the confidentiality and integrity of information transmitted. Identification
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-54


and authentication requirements for information system access by other than organizational users
are described in IA-8.
The identification and authentication requirements in this control are satisfied by complying with
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12 consistent with organization-specific implementation
plans provided to OMB. In addition to identifying and authenticating users at the informationsystem
level (i.e., at logon), identification and authentication mechanisms are employed at the
application level, when necessary, to provide increased information security for the organization.
Related controls: AC-14, AC-17, AC-18, IA-4, IA-5.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system uses multifactor authentication for network access to privileged accounts.
(2) The information system uses multifactor authentication for network access to non-privileged
accounts.
(3) The information system uses multifactor authentication for local access to privileged accounts.
(4) The information system uses multifactor authentication for local access to non-privileged
accounts.
(5) The organization:
(a) Allows the use of group authenticators only when used in conjunction with an
individual/unique authenticator; and
(b) Requires individuals to be authenticated with an individual authenticator prior to using a
group authenticator.
(6) The information system uses multifactor authentication for network access to privileged accounts
where one of the factors is provided by a device separate from the information system being
accessed.
(7) The information system uses multifactor authentication for network access to non-privileged
accounts where one of the factors is provided by a device separate from the information system
being accessed.
(8) The information system uses [Assignment: organization-defined replay-resistant authentication
mechanisms] for network access to privileged accounts.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An authentication process resists replay attacks if it is
impractical to achieve a successful authentication by recording and replaying a previous
authentication message. Techniques used to address this include protocols that use nonces or
challenges (e.g., TLS), and time synchronous or challenge-response one-time authenticators.
(9) The information system uses [Assignment: organization-defined replay-resistant authentication
mechanisms] for network access to non-privileged accounts.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An authentication process resists replay attacks if it is
impractical to achieve a successful authentication by recording and replaying a previous
authentication message. Techniques used to address this include protocols that use nonces or
challenges (e.g., TLS), and time synchronous or challenge-response one-time authenticators.
References: HSPD 12; OMB Memorandum 04-04; FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special
Publications 800-63, 800-73, 800-76, 800-78.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-2 (1) MOD IA-2 (1) (2) (3) (8) HIGH IA-2 (1) (2) (3) (4) (8) (9)
IA-3 DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION
Control: The information system uniquely identifies and authenticates [Assignment: organizationdefined
list of specific and/or types of devices] before establishing a connection.
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-55


Supplemental Guidance: The devices requiring unique identification and authentication may be
defined by type, by specific device, or by a combination of type and device as deemed appropriate
by the organization. The information system typically uses either shared known information (e.g.,
Media Access Control [MAC] or Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol [TCP/IP]
addresses) for identification or an organizational authentication solution (e.g., IEEE 802.1x and
Extensible Authentication Protocol [EAP], Radius server with EAP-Transport Layer Security
[TLS] authentication, Kerberos) to identify and authenticate devices on local and/or wide area
networks. The required strength of the device authentication mechanism is determined by the
security categorization of the information system.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system authenticates devices before establishing remote and wireless network
connections using bidirectional authentication between devices that is cryptographically based.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Remote network connection is any connection with a
device communicating through an external network (e.g., the Internet). Related controls: AC-
17, AC-18.
(2) The information system authenticates devices before establishing network connections using
bidirectional authentication between devices that is cryptographically based.
(3) The organization standardizes, with regard to dynamic address allocation, Dynamic Host Control
Protocol (DHCP) lease information and the time assigned to devices, and audits lease information
when assigned to a device.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: With regard to dynamic address allocation for devices,
DHCP-enabled clients typically obtain leases for IP addresses from DHCP servers.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD IA-3 HIGH IA-3
IA-4 IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT
Control: The organization manages information system identifiers for users and devices by:
a. Receiving authorization from a designated organizational official to assign a user or device
identifier;
b. Selecting an identifier that uniquely identifies an individual or device;
c. Assigning the user identifier to the intended party or the device identifier to the intended
device;
d. Preventing reuse of user or device identifiers for [Assignment: organization-defined time
period]; and
e. Disabling the user identifier after [Assignment: organization-defined time period of
inactivity].
Supplemental Guidance: Common device identifiers include media access control (MAC) or Internet
protocol (IP) addresses, or device-unique token identifiers. Management of user identifiers is not
applicable to shared information system accounts (e.g., guest and anonymous accounts). It is
commonly the case that a user identifier is the name of an information system account associated
with an individual. In such instances, identifier management is largely addressed by the account
management activities of AC-2. IA-4 also covers user identifiers not necessarily associated with
an information system account (e.g., the identifier used in a physical security control database
accessed by a badge reader system for access to the information system). Related control: AC-2,
IA-2.
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-56


Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization prohibits the use of information system account identifiers as public identifiers
for user electronic mail accounts (i.e., user identifier portion of the electronic mail address).
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The organization implements this control enhancement to
the extent that the information system allows.
(2) The organization requires that registration to receive a user ID and password include authorization
by a supervisor, and be done in person before a designated registration authority.
(3) The organization requires multiple forms of certification of individual identification such as
documentary evidence or a combination of documents and biometrics be presented to the
registration authority.
(4) The organization manages user identifiers by uniquely identifying the user as [Assignment:
organization-defined characteristic identifying user status].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Characteristics identifying user status include, for
example, contractors and foreign nationals.
(5) The information system dynamically manages identifiers, attributes, and associated access
authorizations.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: In contrast to conventional approaches to identification
and authentication which employ static information system accounts for preregistered users,
many service-oriented architecture implementations rely on establishing identities at run time
for entities that were previously unknown. Dynamic establishment of identities and
association of attributes and privileges with these identities is anticipated and provisioned.
Pre-established trust relationships and mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate
identities and related credentials are essential.
References: FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800-73, 800-76, 800-78.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-4 MOD IA-4 HIGH IA-4
IA-5 AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT
Control: The organization manages information system authenticators for users and devices by:
a. Verifying, as part of the initial authenticator distribution, the identity of the individual and/or
device receiving the authenticator;
b. Establishing initial authenticator content for authenticators defined by the organization;
c. Ensuring that authenticators have sufficient strength of mechanism for their intended use;
d. Establishing and implementing administrative procedures for initial authenticator distribution,
for lost/compromised or damaged authenticators, and for revoking authenticators;
e. Changing default content of authenticators upon information system installation;
f. Establishing minimum and maximum lifetime restrictions and reuse conditions for
authenticators (if appropriate);
g. Changing/refreshing authenticators [Assignment: organization-defined time period by
authenticator type];
h. Protecting authenticator content from unauthorized disclosure and modification; and
i. Requiring users to take, and having devices implement, specific measures to safeguard
authenticators.
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-57


Supplemental Guidance: User authenticators include, for example, passwords, tokens, biometrics,
PKI certificates, and key cards. Initial authenticator content is the actual content (e.g., the initial
password) as opposed to requirements about authenticator content (e.g., minimum password
length). Many information system components are shipped with factory default authentication
credentials to allow for initial installation and configuration. Default authentication credentials are
often well known, easily discoverable, present a significant security risk, and therefore, are
changed upon installation. The requirement to protect user authenticators may be implemented via
control PL-4 or PS-6 for authenticators in the possession of users and by controls AC-3, AC-6,
and SC-28 for authenticators stored within the information system (e.g., passwords stored in a
hashed or encrypted format, files containing encrypted or hashed passwords accessible only with
super user privileges). The information system supports user authenticator management by
organization-defined settings and restrictions for various authenticator characteristics including,
for example, minimum password length, password composition, validation time window for time
synchronous one time tokens, and number of allowed rejections during verification stage of
biometric authentication. Measures to safeguard user authenticators include, for example,
maintaining possession of individual authenticators, not loaning or sharing authenticators with
others, and reporting lost or compromised authenticators immediately. Authenticator management
includes issuing and revoking, when no longer needed, authenticators for temporary access such as
that required for remote maintenance. Device authenticators include, for example, certificates and
passwords. Related controls: AC-2, IA-2, PL-4, PS-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system, for password-based authentication:
(a) Enforces minimum password complexity of [Assignment: organization-defined requirements
for case sensitivity, number of characters, mix of upper-case letters, lower-case letters,
numbers, and special characters, including minimum requirements for each type];
(b) Enforces at least a [Assignment: organization-defined number of changed characters] when
new passwords are created;
(c) Encrypts passwords in storage and in transmission;
(d) Enforces password minimum and maximum lifetime restrictions of [Assignment: organizationdefined
numbers for lifetime minimum, lifetime maximum]; and
(e) Prohibits password reuse for [Assignment: organization-defined number] generations.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is intended primarily for
environments where passwords are used as a single factor to authenticate users, or in a similar
manner along with one or more additional authenticators. The enhancement generally does
not apply to situations where passwords are used to unlock hardware authenticators. The
implementation of such password mechanisms may not meet all of the requirements in the
enhancement.
(2) The information system, for PKI-based authentication:
(a) Validates certificates by constructing a certification path with status information to an
accepted trust anchor;
(b) Enforces authorized access to the corresponding private key; and
(c) Maps the authenticated identity to the user account.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Status information for certification paths includes, for
example, certificate revocation lists or online certificate status protocol responses.
(3) The organization requires that the registration process to receive [Assignment: organizationdefined
types of and/or specific authenticators] be carried out in person before a designated
registration authority with authorization by a designated organizational official (e.g., a supervisor).
(4) The organization employs automated tools to determine if authenticators are sufficiently strong to
resist attacks intended to discover or otherwise compromise the authenticators.
(5) The organization requires vendors and/or manufacturers of information system components to
provide unique authenticators or change default authenticators prior to delivery.
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-58


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement extends the requirement for
organizations to change default authenticators upon information system installation, by
requiring vendors and/or manufacturers of information system components to provide unique
authenticators or change default authenticators for those components prior to delivery to the
organization. Unique authenticators are assigned by vendors and/or manufacturers to specific
information system components (i.e., delivered information technology products) with distinct
serial numbers. This requirement is included in acquisition documents prepared by the
organization when procuring information systems and/or information system components.
(6) The organization protects authenticators commensurate with the classification or sensitivity of the
information accessed.
(7) The organization ensures that unencrypted static authenticators are not embedded in applications
or access scripts or stored on function keys.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organizations exercise caution in determining whether an
embedded or stored authenticator is in encrypted or unencrypted form. If the authenticator in
its stored representation, is used in the manner stored, then that representation is considered
an unencrypted authenticator. This is irrespective of whether that representation is perhaps an
encrypted version of something else (e.g., a password).
(8) The organization takes [Assignment: organization-defined measures] to manage the risk of
compromise due to individuals having accounts on multiple information systems.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: When an individual has accounts on multiple information
systems, there is the risk that if one account is compromised and the individual is using the
same user identifier and authenticator, other accounts will be compromised as well. Possible
alternatives include, but are not limited to: (i) having the same user identifier but different
authenticators on all systems; (ii) having different user identifiers and authenticators on each
system; (iii) employing some form of single sign-on mechanism; or (iv) including some form
of one-time passwords on all systems.
References: OMB Memorandum 04-04; FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800-73,
800-63, 800-76, 800-78.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-5 (1) MOD IA-5 (1) (2) (3) HIGH IA-5 (1) (2) (3)
IA-6 AUTHENTICATOR FEEDBACK
Control: The information system obscures feedback of authentication information during the
authentication process to protect the information from possible exploitation/use by unauthorized
individuals.
Supplemental Guidance: The feedback from the information system does not provide information
that would allow an unauthorized user to compromise the authentication mechanism. Displaying
asterisks when a user types in a password, is an example of obscuring feedback of authentication
information.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-59


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-6 MOD IA-6 HIGH IA-6
IA-7 CRYPTOGRAPHIC MODULE AUTHENTICATION
Control: The information system uses mechanisms for authentication to a cryptographic module
that meet the requirements of applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies,
regulations, standards, and guidance for such authentication.
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publication 140-2; Web: CSRC.NIST.GOV/CRYPTVAL.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-7 MOD IA-7 HIGH IA-7
IA-8 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)
Control: The information system uniquely identifies and authenticates non-organizational users (or
processes acting on behalf of non-organizational users).
Supplemental Guidance: Non-organizational users include all information system users other than
organizational users explicitly covered by IA-2. Users are uniquely identified and authenticated
for all accesses other than those accesses explicitly identified and documented by the organization
in accordance with AC-14. In accordance with the E-Authentication E-Government initiative,
authentication of non-organizational users accessing federal information systems may be required
to protect federal, proprietary, or privacy-related information (with exceptions noted for national
security systems). Accordingly, a risk assessment is used in determining the authentication needs
of the organization. Scalability, practicality, and security are simultaneously considered in
balancing the need to ensure ease of use for access to federal information and information systems
with the need to protect and adequately mitigate risk to organizational operations, organizational
assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Identification and authentication
requirements for information system access by organizational users are described in IA-2. Related
controls: AC-14, AC-17, AC-18, MA-4.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: OMB Memorandum 04-04; Web: WWW.CIO.GOV/EAUTHENTICATION; NIST Special
Publication 800-63.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IA-8 MOD IA-8 HIGH IA-8
APPENDIX F-IA PAGE F-60


FAMILY: INCIDENT RESPONSE CLASS: OPERATIONAL
IR-1 INCIDENT RESPONSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented incident response policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the incident response
policy and associated incident response controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the incident response family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The incident response policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Incident response procedures can be developed
for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when required. The
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the incident
response policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-61, 800-83, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IR-1 MOD IR-1 HIGH IR-1
IR-2 INCIDENT RESPONSE TRAINING
Control: The organization:
a. Trains personnel in their incident response roles and responsibilities with respect to the
information system; and
b. Provides refresher training [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: Incident response training includes user training in the identification and
reporting of suspicious activities, both from external and internal sources. Related control: AT-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization incorporates simulated events into incident response training to facilitate
effective response by personnel in crisis situations.
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to provide a more thorough and realistic
training environment.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-16, 800-50.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW IR-2 MOD IR-2 HIGH IR-2 (1) (2)
APPENDIX F-IR PAGE F-61


IR-3 INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING AND EXERCISES
Control: The organization tests and/or exercises the incident response capability for the information
system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] using [Assignment: organization-defined
tests and/or exercises] to determine the incident response effectiveness and documents the results.
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to more thoroughly and effectively test/exercise
the incident response capability.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Automated mechanisms can provide the ability to more
thoroughly and effectively test or exercise the incident response capability by providing more
complete coverage of incident response issues, selecting more realistic test/exercise scenarios
and environments, and more effectively stressing the response capability. Related control:
AT-2.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-84, 800-115.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD IR-3 HIGH IR-3 (1)
IR-4 INCIDENT HANDLING
Control: The organization:
a. Implements an incident handling capability for security incidents that includes preparation,
detection and analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery;
b. Coordinates incident handling activities with contingency planning activities; and
c. Incorporates lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response
procedures, training, and testing/exercises, and implements the resulting changes accordingly.
Supplemental Guidance: Incident-related information can be obtained from a variety of sources
including, but not limited to, audit monitoring, network monitoring, physical access monitoring,
and user/administrator reports. Related controls: AU-6, CP-2, IR-2, IR-3, PE-6, SC-5, SC-7, SI-3,
SI-4, SI-7.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to support the incident handling process.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An online incident management system is an example of
an automated mechanism.
(2) The organization includes dynamic reconfiguration of the information system as part of the
incident response capability.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Dynamic reconfiguration includes, for example, changes
to router rules, access control lists, intrusion detection/prevention system parameters, and
filter rules for firewalls and gateways.
(3) The organization identifies classes of incidents and defines appropriate actions to take in response
to ensure continuation of organizational missions and business functions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Classes of incidents include, for example, malfunctions
due to design/implementation errors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted
malicious attacks. Incident response actions that may be appropriate include, for example,
graceful degradation, information system shutdown, fall back to manual mode or alternative
technology whereby the system operates differently, employing deceptive measures (e.g.,
APPENDIX F-IR PAGE F-62


false data flows, false status measures), alternate information flows, or operating in a mode
that is reserved solely for when a system is under attack.
(4) The organization correlates incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an
organization-wide perspective on incident awareness and response.
(5) The organization implements a configurable capability to automatically disable the information
system if any of the following security violations are detected: [Assignment: organization-defined
list of security violations].
References: NIST Special Publication 800-61.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IR-4 MOD IR-4 (1) HIGH IR-4 (1)
IR-5 INCIDENT MONITORING
Control: The organization tracks and documents information system security incidents.
Supplemental Guidance: Documenting information system security incidents includes, for example,
maintaining records about each incident, the status of the incident, and other pertinent information
necessary for forensics, evaluating incident details, trends, and handling. Incident information can
be obtained from a variety of sources including, for example, incident reports, incident response
teams, audit monitoring, network monitoring, physical access monitoring, and user/administrator
reports.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to assist in the tracking of security incidents
and in the collection and analysis of incident information.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Automated mechanisms for tracking security incidents
and collecting/analyzing incident information include, for example, the Einstein network
monitoring device and monitoring online Computer Incident Response Centers (CIRCs) or
other electronic databases of incidents. Related controls: AU-6, AU-7, SI-4.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-61.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IR-5 MOD IR-5 HIGH IR-5 (1)
IR-6 INCIDENT REPORTING
Control: The organization:
a. Requires personnel to report suspected security incidents to the organizational incident
response capability within [Assignment: organization-defined time-period]; and
b. Reports security incident information to designated authorities.
Supplemental Guidance: The intent of this control is to address both specific incident reporting
requirements within an organization and the formal incident reporting requirements for federal
agencies and their subordinate organizations. The types of security incidents reported, the content
and timeliness of the reports, and the list of designated reporting authorities are consistent with
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Current federal policy requires that all federal agencies (unless specifically exempted
from such requirements) report security incidents to the United States Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (US-CERT) within specified time frames designated in the US-CERT Concept of
Operations for Federal Cyber Security Incident Handling. Related controls: IR-4, IR-5.
APPENDIX F-IR PAGE F-63


Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to assist in the reporting of security incidents.
(2) The organization reports information system weaknesses, deficiencies, and/or vulnerabilities
associated with reported security incidents to appropriate organizational officials.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-61: Web: WWW.US-CERT.GOV.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IR-6 MOD IR-6 (1) HIGH IR-6 (1)
IR-7 INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE
Control: The organization provides an incident response support resource, integral to the
organizational incident response capability, that offers advice and assistance to users of the
information system for the handling and reporting of security incidents.
Supplemental Guidance: Possible implementations of incident response support resources in an
organization include a help desk or an assistance group and access to forensics services, when
required. Related controls: IR-4, IR-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to increase the availability of incident responserelated
information and support.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Automated mechanisms can provide a push and/or pull
capability for users to obtain incident response assistance. For example, individuals might
have access to a website to query the assistance capability, or conversely, the assistance
capability may have the ability to proactively send information to users (general distribution
or targeted) as part of increasing understanding of current response capabilities and support.
(2) The organization:
(a) Establishes a direct, cooperative relationship between its incident response capability and
external providers of information system protection capability; and
(b) Identifies organizational incident response team members to the external providers.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: External providers of information system protection
capability include, for example, the Computer Network Defense program within the U.S.
Department of Defense. External providers help to protect, monitor, analyze, detect, and
respond to unauthorized activity within organizational information systems and networks.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW IR-7 MOD IR-7 (1) HIGH IR-7 (1)
IR-8 INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control: The organization:
a. Develops an incident response plan that:
- Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
- Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
APPENDIX F-IR PAGE F-64


- Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the overall
organization;
- Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size, structure,
and functions;
- Defines reportable incidents;
- Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization.
- Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and mature
an incident response capability; and
- Is reviewed and approved by designated officials within the organization;
b. Distributes copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined list of
incident response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Reviews the incident response plan [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
d. Revises the incident response plan to address system/organizational changes or problems
encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing; and
e. Communicates incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined list of
incident response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements].
Supplemental Guidance: It is important that organizations have a formal, focused, and coordinated
approach to responding to incidents. The organization’s mission, strategies, and goals for incident
response help determine the structure of its incident response capability.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-61.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW IR-8 MOD IR-8 HIGH IR-8
APPENDIX F-IR PAGE F-65


FAMILY: MAINTENANCE CLASS: OPERATIONAL
MA-1 SYSTEM MAINTENANCE POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented information system maintenance policy that addresses purpose, scope,
roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities,
and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the information system
maintenance policy and associated system maintenance controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the system maintenance family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable
federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The information system maintenance policy can be included as part of
the general information security policy for the organization. System maintenance procedures can
be developed for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when
required. The organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the
system maintenance policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW MA-1 MOD MA-1 HIGH MA-1
MA-2 CONTROLLED MAINTENANCE
Control: The organization:
a. Schedules, performs, documents, and reviews records of maintenance and repairs on
information system components in accordance with manufacturer or vendor specifications
and/or organizational requirements;
b. Controls all maintenance activities, whether performed on site or remotely and whether the
equipment is serviced on site or removed to another location;
c. Requires that a designated official explicitly approve the removal of the information system or
system components from organizational facilities for off-site maintenance or repairs;
d. Sanitizes equipment to remove all information from associated media prior to removal from
organizational facilities for off-site maintenance or repairs; and
e. Checks all potentially impacted security controls to verify that the controls are still
functioning properly following maintenance or repair actions.
Supplemental Guidance: The control is intended to address the information security aspects of the
organization’s information system maintenance program. Related controls: MP-6, SI-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization maintains maintenance records for the information system that include:
(a) Date and time of maintenance;
(b) Name of the individual performing the maintenance;
APPENDIX F-MA PAGE F-66


(c) Name of escort, if necessary;
(d) A description of the maintenance performed; and
(e) A list of equipment removed or replaced (including identification numbers, if applicable).
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to schedule, conduct, and document
maintenance and repairs as required, producing up-to date, accurate, complete, and available
records of all maintenance and repair actions, needed, in process, and completed.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW MA-2 MOD MA-2 (1) HIGH MA-2 (1) (2)
MA-3 MAINTENANCE TOOLS
Control: The organization approves, controls, monitors the use of, and maintains on an ongoing
basis, information system maintenance tools.
Supplemental Guidance: The intent of this control is to address the security-related issues arising
from the hardware and software brought into the information system specifically for diagnostic
and repair actions (e.g., a hardware or software packet sniffer that is introduced for the purpose of
a particular maintenance activity). Hardware and/or software components that may support
information system maintenance, yet are a part of the system (e.g., the software implementing
“ping,” “ls,” “ipconfig,” or the hardware and software implementing the monitoring port of an
Ethernet switch) are not covered by this control. Related control: MP-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization inspects all maintenance tools carried into a facility by maintenance personnel
for obvious improper modifications.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Maintenance tools include, for example, diagnostic and
test equipment used to conduct maintenance on the information system.
(2) The organization checks all media containing diagnostic and test programs for malicious code
before the media are used in the information system.
(3) The organization prevents the unauthorized removal of maintenance equipment by one of the
following: (i) verifying that there is no organizational information contained on the equipment; (ii)
sanitizing or destroying the equipment; (iii) retaining the equipment within the facility; or (iv)
obtaining an exemption from a designated organization official explicitly authorizing removal of the
equipment from the facility.
(4) The organization employs automated mechanisms to restrict the use of maintenance tools to
authorized personnel only.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-88.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD MA-3 (1) (2) HIGH MA-3 (1) (2) (3)
MA-4 NON-LOCAL MAINTENANCE
Control: The organization:
a. Authorizes, monitors, and controls non-local maintenance and diagnostic activities;
b. Allows the use of non-local maintenance and diagnostic tools only as consistent with
organizational policy and documented in the security plan for the information system;
APPENDIX F-MA PAGE F-67


c. Employs strong identification and authentication techniques in the establishment of non-local
maintenance and diagnostic sessions;
d. Maintains records for non-local maintenance and diagnostic activities; and
e. Terminates all sessions and network connections when non-local maintenance is completed.
Supplemental Guidance: Non-local maintenance and diagnostic activities are those activities
conducted by individuals communicating through a network; either an external network (e.g., the
Internet) or an internal network. Local maintenance and diagnostic activities are those activities
carried out by individuals physically present at the information system or information system
component and not communicating across a network connection. Identification and authentication
techniques used in the establishment of non-local maintenance and diagnostic sessions are
consistent with the network access requirements in IA-2. Strong authenticators include, for
example, PKI where certificates are stored on a token protected by a password, passphrase, or
biometric. Enforcing requirements in MA-4 is accomplished in part, by other controls. Related
controls: AC-2, AC-3, AC-6, AC-17, AU-2, AU-3, IA-2, IA-8, MA-5, MP-6, SC-7.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization audits non-local maintenance and diagnostic sessions and designated
organizational personnel review the maintenance records of the sessions.
(2) The organization documents, in the security plan for the information system, the installation and
use of non-local maintenance and diagnostic connections.
(3) The organization:
(a) Requires that non-local maintenance and diagnostic services be performed from an
information system that implements a level of security at least as high as that implemented on
the system being serviced; or
(b) Removes the component to be serviced from the information system and prior to non-local
maintenance or diagnostic services, sanitizes the component (with regard to organizational
information) before removal from organizational facilities, and after the service is performed,
inspects and sanitizes the component (with regard to potentially malicious software and
surreptitious implants) before reconnecting the component to the information system.
(4) The organization protects non-local maintenance sessions through the use of a strong
authenticator tightly bound to the user and by separating the maintenance session from other
network sessions with the information system by either:
(a) Physically separated communications paths; or
(b) Logically separated communications paths based upon encryption.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: SC-13.
(5) The organization requires that:
(a) Maintenance personnel notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel] when non-local
maintenance is planned (i.e., date/time); and
(b) A designated organizational official with specific information security/information system
knowledge approves the non-local maintenance.
(6) The organization employs cryptographic mechanisms to protect the integrity and confidentiality of
non-local maintenance and diagnostic communications.
(7) The organization employs remote disconnect verification at the termination of non-local
maintenance and diagnostic sessions.
References: FIPS Publications 140-2, 197, 201; NIST Special Publications 800-63, 800-88; CNSS
Policy 15.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW MA-4 MOD MA-4 (1) (2) HIGH MA-4 (1) (2) (3)
APPENDIX F-MA PAGE F-68


MA-5 MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes a process for maintenance personnel authorization and maintains a current list of
authorized maintenance organizations or personnel; and
b. Ensures that personnel performing maintenance on the information system have required
access authorizations or designates organizational personnel with required access
authorizations and technical competence deemed necessary to supervise information system
maintenance when maintenance personnel do not possess the required access authorizations.
Supplemental Guidance: Individuals not previously identified in the information system, such as
vendor personnel and consultants, may legitimately require privileged access to the system, for
example, when required to conduct maintenance or diagnostic activities with little or no notice.
Based on a prior assessment of risk, the organization may issue temporary credentials to these
individuals. Temporary credentials may be for one-time use or for a very limited time period.
Related controls: IA-8, MA-5.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization maintains procedures for the use of maintenance personnel that lack appropriate
security clearances or are not U.S. citizens, that include the following requirements:
(a) Maintenance personnel who do not have needed access authorizations, clearances, or formal
access approvals are escorted and supervised during the performance of maintenance and
diagnostic activities on the information system by approved organizational personnel who are
fully cleared, have appropriate access authorizations, and are technically qualified;
(b) Prior to initiating maintenance or diagnostic activities by personnel who do not have needed
access authorizations, clearances or formal access approvals, all volatile information storage
components within the information system are sanitized and all nonvolatile storage media are
removed or physically disconnected from the system and secured; and
(c) In the event an information system component cannot be sanitized, the procedures contained
in the security plan for the system are enforced.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The intent of this control enhancement is to deny
individuals who lack appropriate security clearances (i.e., individuals who do not possess
security clearances or possess security clearances at a lower level than required) or who are
not U.S. citizens, visual and electronic access to any classified information, Controlled
Unclassified Information (CUI), or any other sensitive information contained on the
information system. Procedures for the use of maintenance personnel can be documented in
the security plan for the information system.
(2) The organization ensures that personnel performing maintenance and diagnostic activities on an
information system processing, storing, or transmitting classified information are cleared (i.e.,
possess appropriate security clearances) for the highest level of information on the system.
(3) The organization ensures that personnel performing maintenance and diagnostic activities on an
information system processing, storing, or transmitting classified information are U.S. citizens.
(4) The organization ensures that:
(a) Cleared foreign nationals (i.e., foreign nationals with appropriate security clearances), are
used to conduct maintenance and diagnostic activities on an information system only when
the system is jointly owned and operated by the United States and foreign allied governments,
or owned and operated solely by foreign allied governments; and
(b) Approvals, consents, and detailed operational conditions regarding the use of foreign
nationals to conduct maintenance and diagnostic activities on an information system are fully
documented within a Memorandum of Agreement.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW MA-5 MOD MA-5 HIGH MA-5
APPENDIX F-MA PAGE F-69


MA-6 TIMELY MAINTENANCE
Control: The organization obtains maintenance support and/or spare parts for [Assignment:
organization-defined list of security-critical information system components and/or key
information technology components] within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of
failure.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization specifies those information system components that,
when not operational, result in increased risk to organizations, individuals, or the Nation because
the security functionality intended by that component is not being provided. Security-critical
components include, for example, firewalls, guards, gateways, intrusion detection systems, audit
repositories, authentication servers, and intrusion prevention systems. Related control: CP-2.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD MA-6 HIGH MA-6
APPENDIX F-MA PAGE F-70


FAMILY: MEDIA PROTECTION CLASS: OPERATIONAL
MP-1 MEDIA PROTECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented media protection policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the media protection
policy and associated media protection controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the media protection family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The media protection policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Media protection procedures can be developed
for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when required. The
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the media protection
policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW MP-1 MOD MP-1 HIGH MP-1
MP-2 MEDIA ACCESS
Control: The organization restricts access to [Assignment: organization-defined types of digital and
non-digital media] to [Assignment: organization-defined list of authorized individuals] using
[Assignment: organization-defined security measures].
Supplemental Guidance: Information system media includes both digital media (e.g., diskettes,
magnetic tapes, external/removable hard drives, flash/thumb drives, compact disks, digital video
disks) and non-digital media (e.g., paper, microfilm). This control also applies to mobile
computing and communications devices with information storage capability (e.g., notebook/laptop
computers, personal digital assistants, cellular telephones, digital cameras, and audio recording
devices). An organizational assessment of risk guides the selection of media and associated
information contained on that media requiring restricted access. Organizations document in policy
and procedures, the media requiring restricted access, individuals authorized to access the media,
and the specific measures taken to restrict access. Fewer protection measures are needed for
media containing information determined by the organization to be in the public domain, to be
publicly releasable, or to have limited or no adverse impact if accessed by other than authorized
personnel. In these situations, it is assumed that the physical access controls where the media
resides provide adequate protection. Related controls: MP-4, PE-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to restrict access to media storage areas and to
audit access attempts and access granted.
APPENDIX F-MP PAGE F-71


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is primarily applicable to media
storage areas within an organization where a significant volume of media is stored and is not
applicable to every location where some media is stored (e.g., in individual offices).
(2) The information system uses cryptographic mechanisms to protect and restrict access to
information on portable digital media.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800-111.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW MP-2 MOD MP-2 (1) HIGH MP-2 (1)
MP-3 MEDIA MARKING
Control: The organization:
a. Marks, in accordance with organizational policies and procedures, removable information
system media and information system output indicating the distribution limitations, handling
caveats, and applicable security markings (if any) of the information; and
b. Exempts [Assignment: organization-defined list of removable media types] from marking as
long as the exempted items remain within [Assignment: organization-defined controlled
areas].
Supplemental Guidance: The term marking is used when referring to the application or use of
human-readable security attributes. The term labeling is used when referring to the application or
use of security attributes with regard to internal data structures within the information system (see
AC-16, Security Attributes). Removable information system media includes both digital media
(e.g., diskettes, magnetic tapes, external/removable hard drives, flash/thumb drives, compact disks,
digital video disks) and non-digital media (e.g., paper, microfilm). An organizational assessment
of risk guides the selection of media requiring marking. Marking is generally not required for
media containing information determined by the organization to be in the public domain or to be
publicly releasable. Some organizations, however, may require markings for public information
indicating that the information is publicly releasable. Organizations may extend the scope of this
control to include information system output devices containing organizational information,
including, for example, monitors and printers. Marking of removable media and information
system output is consistent with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies,
regulations, standards, and guidance.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publication 199.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD MP-3 HIGH MP-3
MP-4 MEDIA STORAGE
Control: The organization:
a. Physically controls and securely stores [Assignment: organization-defined types of digital and
non-digital media] within [Assignment: organization-defined controlled areas] using
[Assignment: organization-defined security measures];
b. Protects information system media until the media are destroyed or sanitized using approved
equipment, techniques, and procedures.
APPENDIX F-MP PAGE F-72


Supplemental Guidance: Information system media includes both digital media (e.g., diskettes,
magnetic tapes, external/removable hard drives, flash/thumb drives, compact disks, digital video
disks) and non-digital media (e.g., paper, microfilm). This control also applies to mobile
computing and communications devices with information storage capability (e.g., notebook/laptop
computers, personal digital assistants, cellular telephones, digital cameras, and audio recording
devices). Telephone systems are also considered information systems and may have the capability
to store information on internal media (e.g., on voicemail systems). Since telephone systems do
not have, in most cases, the identification, authentication, and access control mechanisms typically
employed in other information systems, organizational personnel use extreme caution in the types
of information stored on telephone voicemail systems. A controlled area is any area or space for
which the organization has confidence that the physical and procedural protections are sufficient
to meet the requirements established for protecting the information and/or information system.
An organizational assessment of risk guides the selection of media and associated information
contained on that media requiring physical protection. Fewer protection measures are needed for
media containing information determined by the organization to be in the public domain, to be
publicly releasable, or to have limited or no adverse impact on the organization or individuals if
accessed by other than authorized personnel. In these situations, it is assumed that the physical
access controls to the facility where the media resides provide adequate protection.
As part of a defense-in-depth strategy, the organization considers routinely encrypting information
at rest on selected secondary storage devices. The employment of cryptography is at the discretion
of the information owner/steward. The selection of the cryptographic mechanisms used is based
upon maintaining the confidentiality and integrity of the information. The strength of mechanisms
is commensurate with the classification and sensitivity of the information. Related controls: AC-
3, AC-19, CP-6, CP-9, MP-2, PE-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs cryptographic mechanisms to protect information in storage.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: SC-13.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-56, 800-57, 800-111.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD MP-4 HIGH MP-4
MP-5 MEDIA TRANSPORT
Control: The organization:
a. Protects and controls [Assignment: organization-defined types of digital and non-digital
media] during transport outside of controlled areas using [Assignment: organization-defined
security measures];
b. Maintains accountability for information system media during transport outside of controlled
areas; and
c. Restricts the activities associated with transport of such media to authorized personnel.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system media includes both digital media (e.g., diskettes,
magnetic tapes, removable hard drives, flash/thumb drives, compact disks, digital video disks) and
non-digital media (e.g., paper, microfilm). This control also applies to mobile computing and
communications devices with information storage capability (e.g., notebook/laptop computers,
personal digital assistants, cellular telephones, digital cameras, and audio recording devices) that
are transported outside of controlled areas. Telephone systems are also considered information
systems and may have the capability to store information on internal media (e.g., on voicemail
systems). Since telephone systems do not have, in most cases, the identification, authentication,
APPENDIX F-MP PAGE F-73


and access control mechanisms typically employed in other information systems, organizational
personnel use caution in the types of information stored on telephone voicemail systems that are
transported outside of controlled areas. A controlled area is any area or space for which the
organization has confidence that the physical and procedural protections provided are sufficient to
meet the requirements established for protecting the information and/or information system.
Physical and technical security measures for the protection of digital and non-digital media are
commensurate with the classification or sensitivity of the information residing on the media, and
consistent with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations,
standards, and guidance. Locked containers and cryptography are examples of security measures
available to protect digital and non-digital media during transport. Cryptographic mechanisms can
provide confidentiality and/or integrity protections depending upon the mechanisms used. An
organizational assessment of risk guides: (i) the selection of media and associated information
contained on that media requiring protection during transport; and (ii) the selection and use of
storage containers for transporting non-digital media. Authorized transport and courier personnel
may include individuals from outside the organization (e.g., U.S. Postal Service or a commercial
transport or delivery service). Related controls: AC-19, CP-9.
Control Enhancements:
(1) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP-5].
(2) The organization documents activities associated with the transport of information system media.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organizations establish documentation requirements for
activities associated with the transport of information system media in accordance with the
organizational assessment of risk to include the flexibility to define different record-keeping
methods for different types of media transport as part of an overall system of transport-related
records.
(3) The organization employs an identified custodian throughout the transport of information system
media.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Custodial responsibilities can be transferred from one
individual to another as long as an unambiguous custodian is identified at all times.
(4) The organization employs cryptographic mechanisms to protect the confidentiality and integrity of
information stored on digital media during transport outside of controlled areas.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement also applies to mobile devices.
Mobile devices include portable storage media (e.g., USB memory sticks, external hard disk
drives) and portable computing and communications devices with storage capability (e.g.,
notebook/laptop computers, personal digital assistants, cellular telephones). Related control:
MP-4. Related controls: MP-2; SC-13.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800-60.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD MP-5 (2) (4) HIGH MP-5 (2) (3) (4)
MP-6 MEDIA SANITIZATION
Control: The organization:
a. Sanitizes information system media, both digital and non-digital, prior to disposal, release out
of organizational control, or release for reuse; and
b. Employs sanitization mechanisms with strength and integrity commensurate with the
classification or sensitivity of the information.
APPENDIX F-MP PAGE F-74


Supplemental Guidance: This control applies to all media subject to disposal or reuse, whether or not
considered removable. Sanitization is the process used to remove information from information
system media such that there is reasonable assurance that the information cannot be retrieved or
reconstructed. Sanitization techniques, including clearing, purging, and destroying media
information, prevent the disclosure of organizational information to unauthorized individuals
when such media is reused or released for disposal. The organization uses its discretion on the
employment of sanitization techniques and procedures for media containing information deemed
to be in the public domain or publicly releasable, or deemed to have no adverse impact on the
organization or individuals if released for reuse or disposal.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization tracks, documents, and verifies media sanitization and disposal actions.
(2) The organization tests sanitization equipment and procedures to verify correct performance
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
(3) The organization sanitizes portable, removable storage devices prior to connecting such devices
to the information system under the following circumstances: [Assignment: organization-defined
list of circumstances requiring sanitization of portable, removable storage devices].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Portable, removable storage devices (e.g., thumb drives,
flash drives, external storage devices) can be the source of malicious code insertions into
organizational information systems. Many of these devices are obtained from unknown
sources and may contain various types of malicious code that can be readily transferred to the
information system through USB ports or other entry portals. While scanning such devices is
always recommended, sanitization provides additional assurance that the device is free of all
malicious code to include code capable of initiating zero-day attacks. Organizations consider
sanitization of portable, removable storage devices, for example, when such devices are first
purchased from the manufacturer or vendor prior to initial use or when the organization loses
a positive chain of custody for the device. An organizational assessment of risk guides the
specific circumstances for employing the sanitization process. Related control: SI-3.
(4) The organization sanitizes information system media containing Controlled Unclassified
Information (CUI) or other sensitive information in accordance with applicable organizational
and/or federal standards and policies.
(5) The organization sanitizes information system media containing classified information in
accordance with NSA standards and policies.
(6) The organization destroys information system media that cannot be sanitized.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-60, 800-88; Web:
WWW.NSA.GOV/IA/GUIDANCE/MEDIA_DESTRUCTION_GUIDANCE/INDEX.SHTML.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW MP-6 MOD MP-6 HIGH MP-6 (1) (2) (3)
APPENDIX F-MP PAGE F-75


FAMILY: PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CLASS: OPERATIONAL
PE-1 PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented physical and environmental protection policy that addresses purpose,
scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational
entities, and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the physical and
environmental protection policy and associated physical and environmental protection
controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the physical and environmental protection family. The policy and procedures are consistent
with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The physical and environmental protection policy
can be included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. Physical
and environmental protection procedures can be developed for the security program in general and
for a particular information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy
is a key factor in the development of the physical and environmental protection policy. Related
control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-1 MOD PE-1 HIGH PE-1
PE-2 PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS
Control: The organization:
a. Develops and keeps current a list of personnel with authorized access to the facility where the
information system resides (except for those areas within the facility officially designated as
publicly accessible);
b. Issues authorization credentials;
c. Reviews and approves the access list and authorization credentials [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency], removing from the access list personnel no longer requiring access.
Supplemental Guidance: Authorization credentials include, for example, badges, identification
cards, and smart cards. Related control: PE-3, PE-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization authorizes physical access to the facility where the information system resides
based on position or role.
(2) The organization requires two forms of identification to gain access to the facility where the
information system resides.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of forms of identification are identification
badge, key card, cipher PIN, and biometrics.
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-76


(3) The organization restricts physical access to the facility containing an information system that
processes classified information to authorized personnel with appropriate clearances and access
authorizations.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-2 MOD PE-2 HIGH PE-2
PE-3 PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL
Control: The organization:
a. Enforces physical access authorizations for all physical access points (including designated
entry/exit points) to the facility where the information system resides (excluding those areas
within the facility officially designated as publicly accessible);
b. Verifies individual access authorizations before granting access to the facility;
c. Controls entry to the facility containing the information system using physical access devices
and/or guards;
d. Controls access to areas officially designated as publicly accessible in accordance with the
organization’s assessment of risk;
e. Secures keys, combinations, and other physical access devices;
f. Inventories physical access devices [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
g. Changes combinations and keys [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and when keys
are lost, combinations are compromised, or individuals are transferred or terminated.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization determines the types of guards needed, for example,
professional physical security staff or other personnel such as administrative staff or information
system users, as deemed appropriate. Physical access devices include, for example, keys, locks,
combinations, and card readers. Workstations and associated peripherals connected to (and part
of) an organizational information system may be located in areas designated as publicly accessible
with access to such devices being safeguarded. Related controls: MP-2, MP-4, PE-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization enforces physical access authorizations to the information system independent
of the physical access controls for the facility.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement applies to server rooms, media
storage areas, communications centers, or any other areas within an organizational facility
containing large concentrations of information system components. The intent is to provide
additional physical security for those areas where the organization may be more vulnerable
due to the concentration of information system components. Security requirements for
facilities containing organizational information systems that process, store, or transmit
Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) are consistent with applicable federal laws,
Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. See also PS-3,
security requirements for personnel access to SCI.
(2) The organization performs security checks at the physical boundary of the facility or information
system for unauthorized exfiltration of information or information system components.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The extent/frequency or randomness of the checks is as
deemed necessary by the organization to adequately mitigate risk associated with exfiltration.
(3) The organization guards, alarms, and monitors every physical access point to the facility where the
information system resides 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-77


(4) The organization uses lockable physical casings to protect [Assignment: organization-defined
information system components] from unauthorized physical access.
(5) The information system detects/prevents physical tampering or alteration of hardware components
within the system.
(6) The organization employs a penetration testing process that includes [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency], unannounced attempts to bypass or circumvent security controls associated
with physical access points to the facility.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related control: CA-2.
References: FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800-73, 800-76, 800-78; ICD 704;
DCID 6/9.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-3 MOD PE-3 HIGH PE-3 (1)
PE-4 ACCESS CONTROL FOR TRANSMISSION MEDIUM
Control: The organization controls physical access to information system distribution and
transmission lines within organizational facilities.
Supplemental Guidance: Physical protections applied to information system distribution and
transmission lines help prevent accidental damage, disruption, and physical tampering.
Additionally, physical protections are necessary to help prevent eavesdropping or in transit
modification of unencrypted transmissions. Protective measures to control physical access to
information system distribution and transmission lines include: (i) locked wiring closets; (ii)
disconnected or locked spare jacks; and/or (iii) protection of cabling by conduit or cable trays.
Related control: PE-2.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NSTISSI No. 7003.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-4 HIGH PE-4
PE-5 ACCESS CONTROL FOR OUTPUT DEVICES
Control: The organization controls physical access to information system output devices to prevent
unauthorized individuals from obtaining the output.
Supplemental Guidance: Monitors, printers, and audio devices are examples of information system
output devices.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-5 HIGH PE-5
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-78


PE-6 MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS
Control: The organization:
a. Monitors physical access to the information system to detect and respond to physical security
incidents;
b. Reviews physical access logs [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
c. Coordinates results of reviews and investigations with the organization’s incident response
capability.
Supplemental Guidance: Investigation of and response to detected physical security incidents,
including apparent security violations or suspicious physical access activities, are part of the
organization’s incident response capability.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization monitors real-time physical intrusion alarms and surveillance equipment.
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms to recognize potential intrusions and initiate
designated response actions.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-6 MOD PE-6 (1) HIGH PE-6 (1) (2)
PE-7 VISITOR CONTROL
Control: The organization controls physical access to the information system by authenticating
visitors before authorizing access to the facility where the information system resides other than
areas designated as publicly accessible.
Supplemental Guidance: Individuals (to include organizational employees, contract personnel, and
others) with permanent authorization credentials for the facility are not considered visitors.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization escorts visitors and monitors visitor activity, when required.
(2) The organization requires two forms of identification for visitor access to the facility.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-7 MOD PE-7 (1) HIGH PE-7 (1)
PE-8 ACCESS RECORDS
Control: The organization:
a. Maintains visitor access records to the facility where the information system resides (except
for those areas within the facility officially designated as publicly accessible); and
b. Reviews visitor access records [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: Visitor access records include, for example, name/organization of the
person visiting, signature of the visitor, form(s) of identification, date of access, time of entry and
departure, purpose of visit, and name/organization of person visited.
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-79


Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to facilitate the maintenance and review of
access records.
(2) The organization maintains a record of all physical access, both visitor and authorized individuals.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW PE-8 MOD PE-8 HIGH PE-8 (1) (2)
PE-9 POWER EQUIPMENT AND POWER CABLING
Control: The organization protects power equipment and power cabling for the information system
from damage and destruction.
Supplemental Guidance: This control, to include any enhancements specified, may be satisfied by
similar requirements fulfilled by another organizational entity other than the information security
program. Organizations avoid duplicating actions already covered.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs redundant and parallel power cabling paths.
(2) The organization employs automatic voltage controls for [Assignment: organization-defined list of
critical information system components].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-9 HIGH PE-9
PE-10 EMERGENCY SHUTOFF
Control: The organization:
a. Provides the capability of shutting off power to the information system or individual system
components in emergency situations;
b. Places emergency shutoff switches or devices in [Assignment: organization-defined location
by information system or system component] to facilitate safe and easy access for personnel;
and
c. Protects emergency power shutoff capability from unauthorized activation.
Supplemental Guidance: This control applies to facilities containing concentrations of information
system resources, for example, data centers, server rooms, and mainframe computer rooms.
Control Enhancements:
(1) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into PE-10].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-10 HIGH PE-10
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-80


PE-11 EMERGENCY POWER
Control: The organization provides a short-term uninterruptible power supply to facilitate an
orderly shutdown of the information system in the event of a primary power source loss.
Supplemental Guidance: This control, to include any enhancements specified, may be satisfied by
similar requirements fulfilled by another organizational entity other than the information security
program. Organizations avoid duplicating actions already covered.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization provides a long-term alternate power supply for the information system that is
capable of maintaining minimally required operational capability in the event of an extended loss of
the primary power source.
(2) The organization provides a long-term alternate power supply for the information system that is
self-contained and not reliant on external power generation.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Long-term alternate power supplies for the information
system are either manually or automatically activated.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-11 HIGH PE-11 (1)
PE-12 EMERGENCY LIGHTING
Control: The organization employs and maintains automatic emergency lighting for the
information system that activates in the event of a power outage or disruption and that covers
emergency exits and evacuation routes within the facility.
Supplemental Guidance: This control, to include any enhancements specified, may be satisfied by
similar requirements fulfilled by another organizational entity other than the information security
program. Organizations avoid duplicating actions already covered.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization provides emergency lighting for all areas within the facility supporting essential
missions and business functions.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-12 MOD PE-12 HIGH PE-12
PE-13 FIRE PROTECTION
Control: The organization employs and maintains fire suppression and detection devices/systems
for the information system that are supported by an independent energy source.
Supplemental Guidance: Fire suppression and detection devices/systems include, for example,
sprinkler systems, handheld fire extinguishers, fixed fire hoses, and smoke detectors. This control,
to include any enhancements specified, may be satisfied by similar requirements fulfilled by
another organizational entity other than the information security program. Organizations avoid
duplicating actions already covered.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs fire detection devices/systems for the information system that activate
automatically and notify the organization and emergency responders in the event of a fire.
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-81


(2) The organization employs fire suppression devices/systems for the information system that
provide automatic notification of any activation to the organization and emergency responders.
(3) The organization employs an automatic fire suppression capability for the information system
when the facility is not staffed on a continuous basis.
(4) The organization ensures that the facility undergoes [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]
fire marshal inspections and promptly resolves identified deficiencies.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-13 MOD PE-13 (1) (2) (3) HIGH PE-13 (1) (2) (3)
PE-14 TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY CONTROLS
Control: The organization:
a. Maintains temperature and humidity levels within the facility where the information system
resides at [Assignment: organization-defined acceptable levels]; and
b. Monitors temperature and humidity levels [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: This control, to include any enhancements specified, may be satisfied by
similar requirements fulfilled by another organizational entity other than the information security
program. Organizations avoid duplicating actions already covered.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automatic temperature and humidity controls in the facility to prevent
fluctuations potentially harmful to the information system.
(2) The organization employs temperature and humidity monitoring that provides an alarm or
notification of changes potentially harmful to personnel or equipment.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-14 MOD PE-14 HIGH PE-14
PE-15 WATER DAMAGE PROTECTION
Control: The organization protects the information system from damage resulting from water
leakage by providing master shutoff valves that are accessible, working properly, and known to
key personnel.
Supplemental Guidance: This control, to include any enhancements specified, may be satisfied by
similar requirements fulfilled by another organizational entity other than the information security
program. Organizations avoid duplicating actions already covered.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs mechanisms that, without the need for manual intervention, protect the
information system from water damage in the event of a water leak.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-15 MOD PE-15 HIGH PE-15 (1)
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-82


PE-16 DELIVERY AND REMOVAL
Control: The organization authorizes, monitors, and controls [Assignment: organization-defined
types of information system components] entering and exiting the facility and maintains records of
those items.
Supplemental Guidance: Effectively enforcing authorizations for entry and exit of information
system components may require restricting access to delivery areas and possibly isolating the
areas from the information system and media libraries.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PE-16 MOD PE-16 HIGH PE-16
PE-17 ALTERNATE WORK SITE
Control: The organization:
a. Employs [Assignment: organization-defined management, operational, and technical
information system security controls] at alternate work sites;
b. Assesses as feasible, the effectiveness of security controls at alternate work sites; and
c. Provides a means for employees to communicate with information security personnel in case
of security incidents or problems.
Supplemental Guidance: Alternate work sites may include, for example, government facilities or
private residences of employees. The organization may define different sets of security controls
for specific alternate work sites or types of sites.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-46.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-17 HIGH PE-17
PE-18 LOCATION OF INFORMATION SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Control: The organization positions information system components within the facility to minimize
potential damage from physical and environmental hazards and to minimize the opportunity for
unauthorized access.
Supplemental Guidance: Physical and environmental hazards include, for example, flooding, fire,
tornados, earthquakes, hurricanes, acts of terrorism, vandalism, electromagnetic pulse, electrical
interference, and electromagnetic radiation. Whenever possible, the organization also considers
the location or site of the facility with regard to physical and environmental hazards. In addition,
the organization considers the location of physical entry points where unauthorized individuals,
while not being granted access, might nonetheless be in close proximity to the information system
and therefore, increase the potential for unauthorized access to organizational communications
(e.g., through the use of wireless sniffers or microphones). This control, to include any
enhancements specified, may be satisfied by similar requirements fulfilled by another
organizational entity other than the information security program. Organizations avoid duplicating
actions already covered.
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-83


Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization plans the location or site of the facility where the information system resides with
regard to physical and environmental hazards and for existing facilities, considers the physical and
environmental hazards in its risk mitigation strategy.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD PE-18 HIGH PE-18 (1)
PE-19 INFORMATION LEAKAGE
Control: The organization protects the information system from information leakage due to
electromagnetic signals emanations.
Supplemental Guidance: The security categorization of the information system (with respect to
confidentiality) and organizational security policy guides the application of safeguards and
countermeasures employed to protect the information system against information leakage due to
electromagnetic signals emanations.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization ensures that information system components, associated data communications,
and networks are protected in accordance with: (i) national emissions and TEMPEST policies and
procedures; and (ii) the sensitivity of the information being transmitted.
References: FIPS Publication 199.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
APPENDIX F-PE PAGE F-84


FAMILY: PLANNING CLASS: MANAGEMENT
PL-1 SECURITY PLANNING POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented security planning policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the security planning
policy and associated security planning controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the security planning family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The security planning policy addresses the overall policy requirements
for confidentiality, integrity, and availability and can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Security planning procedures can be developed
for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when required. The
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the security
planning policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-18, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PL-1 MOD PL-1 HIGH PL-1
PL-2 SYSTEM SECURITY PLAN
Control: The organization:
a. Develops a security plan for the information system that:
- Is consistent with the organization’s enterprise architecture;
- Explicitly defines the authorization boundary for the system;
- Describes the operational context of the information system in terms of missions and
business processes;
- Provides the security categorization of the information system including supporting
rationale;
- Describes the operational environment for the information system;
- Describes relationships with or connections to other information systems;
- Provides an overview of the security requirements for the system;
- Describes the security controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements
including a rationale for the tailoring and supplementation decisions; and
- Is reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or designated representative prior to
plan implementation;
APPENDIX F-PL PAGE F-85


b. Reviews the security plan for the information system [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency]; and
c. Updates the plan to address changes to the information system/environment of operation or
problems identified during plan implementation or security control assessments.
Supplemental Guidance: The security plan contains sufficient information (including specification of
parameters for assignment and selection statements in security controls either explicitly or by
reference) to enable an implementation that is unambiguously compliant with the intent of the plan
and a subsequent determination of risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other
organizations, and the Nation if the plan is implemented as intended. Related controls: PM-1,
PM-7, PM-8, PM-9, PM-11.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization:
(a) Develops a security Concept of Operations (CONOPS) for the information system containing,
at a minimum: (i) the purpose of the system; (ii) a description of the system architecture; (iii)
the security authorization schedule; and (iv) the security categorization and associated
factors considered in determining the categorization; and
(b) Reviews and updates the CONOPS [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The security CONOPS may be included in the security
plan for the information system.
(2) The organization develops a functional architecture for the information system that identifies and
maintains:
(a) External interfaces, the information being exchanged across the interfaces, and the protection
mechanisms associated with each interface;
(b) User roles and the access privileges assigned to each role;
(c) Unique security requirements;
(d) Types of information processed, stored, or transmitted by the information system and any
specific protection needs in accordance with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders,
directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance; and
(e) Restoration priority of information or information system services.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Unique security requirements for the information system
include, for example, encryption of key data elements at rest. Specific protection needs for
the information system include, for example, the Privacy Act and Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-18.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PL-2 MOD PL-2 HIGH PL-2
PL-3 SYSTEM SECURITY PLAN UPDATE
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into PL-2].
PL-4 RULES OF BEHAVIOR
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes and makes readily available to all information system users, the rules that describe
their responsibilities and expected behavior with regard to information and information
system usage; and
APPENDIX F-PL PAGE F-86


b. Receives signed acknowledgment from users indicating that they have read, understand, and
agree to abide by the rules of behavior, before authorizing access to information and the
information system.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization considers different sets of rules based on user roles and
responsibilities, for example, differentiating between the rules that apply to privileged users and
rules that apply to general users. Electronic signatures are acceptable for use in acknowledging
rules of behavior. Related control: PS-6.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization includes in the rules of behavior, explicit restrictions on the use of social
networking sites, posting information on commercial websites, and sharing information system
account information.
References: NIST Publication 800-18.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PL-4 MOD PL-4 HIGH PL-4
PL-5 PRIVACY IMPACT ASSESSMENT
Control: The organization conducts a privacy impact assessment on the information system in
accordance with OMB policy.
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: OMB Memorandum 03-22.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PL-5 MOD PL-5 HIGH PL-5
PL-6 SECURITY-RELATED ACTIVITY PLANNING
Control: The organization plans and coordinates security-related activities affecting the information
system before conducting such activities in order to reduce the impact on organizational
operations (i.e., mission, functions, image, and reputation), organizational assets, and individuals.
Supplemental Guidance: Security-related activities include, for example, security assessments,
audits, system hardware and software maintenance, and contingency plan testing/exercises.
Organizational advance planning and coordination includes both emergency and nonemergency
(i.e., planned or nonurgent unplanned) situations.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW Not Selected MOD PL-6 HIGH PL-6
APPENDIX F-PL PAGE F-87


FAMILY: PERSONNEL SECURITY CLASS: OPERATIONAL
PS-1 PERSONNEL SECURITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented personnel security policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the personnel security
policy and associated personnel security controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the personnel security family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The personnel security policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Personnel security procedures can be developed
for the security program in general and for a particular information system, when required. The
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the personnel
security policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PS-1 MOD PS-1 HIGH PS-1
PS-2 POSITION CATEGORIZATION
Control: The organization:
a. Assigns a risk designation to all positions;
b. Establishes screening criteria for individuals filling those positions; and
c. Reviews and revises position risk designations [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: Position risk designations are consistent with Office of Personnel
Management policy and guidance. The screening criteria include explicit information security
role appointment requirements (e.g., training, security clearance).
Control Enhancements: None.
References: 5 CFR 731.106(a).
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PS-2 MOD PS-2 HIGH PS-2
PS-3 PERSONNEL SCREENING
Control: The organization:
a. Screens individuals prior to authorizing access to the information system; and
APPENDIX F-PS PAGE F-88


b. Rescreens individuals according to [Assignment: organization-defined list of conditions
requiring rescreening and, where re-screening is so indicated, the frequency of such
rescreening].
Supplemental Guidance: Screening and rescreening are consistent with applicable federal laws,
Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, guidance, and the criteria established
for the risk designation of the assigned position. The organization may define different rescreening
conditions and frequencies for personnel accessing the information system based on the type of
information processed, stored, or transmitted by the system.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization ensures that every user accessing an information system processing, storing, or
transmitting classified information is cleared and indoctrinated to the highest classification level of
the information on the system.
(2) The organization ensures that every user accessing an information system processing, storing, or
transmitting types of classified information which require formal indoctrination, is formally
indoctrinated for all of the relevant types of information on the system.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Types of information requiring formal indoctrination
include, for example, Special Access Program (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), and Sensitive
Compartment Information (SCI).
References: 5 CFR 731.106; FIPS Publications 199, 201; NIST Special Publications 800-73, 800-
76, 800-78; ICD 704.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PS-3 MOD PS-3 HIGH PS-3
PS-4 PERSONNEL TERMINATION
Control: The organization, upon termination of individual employment:
a. Terminates information system access;
b. Conducts exit interviews;
c. Retrieves all security-related organizational information system-related property; and
d. Retains access to organizational information and information systems formerly controlled by
terminated individual.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system-related property includes, for example, hardware
authentication tokens, system administration technical manuals, keys, identification cards, and
building passes. Exit interviews ensure that individuals understand any security constraints
imposed by being former employees and that proper accountability is achieved for all information
system-related property. Exit interviews may not be possible for some employees (e.g., in the case
of job abandonment, some illnesses, and nonavailability of supervisors). Exit interviews are
important for individuals with security clearances. Timely execution of this control is particularly
essential for employees or contractors terminated for cause.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW PS-4 MOD PS-4 HIGH PS-4
APPENDIX F-PS PAGE F-89


PS-5 PERSONNEL TRANSFER
Control: The organization reviews logical and physical access authorizations to information
systems/facilities when personnel are reassigned or transferred to other positions within the
organization and initiates [Assignment: organization-defined transfer or reassignment actions]
within [Assignment: organization-defined time period following the formal transfer action].
Supplemental Guidance: This control applies when the reassignment or transfer of an employee is
permanent or of such an extended duration as to make the actions warranted. In addition the
organization defines the actions appropriate for the type of reassignment or transfer; whether
permanent or temporary. Actions that may be required when personnel are transferred or
reassigned to other positions within the organization include, for example: (i) returning old and
issuing new keys, identification cards, and building passes; (ii) closing previous information
system accounts and establishing new accounts; (iii) changing information system access
authorizations; and (iv) providing for access to official records to which the employee had access
at the previous work location and in the previous information system accounts.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW PS-5 MOD PS-5 HIGH PS-5
PS-6 ACCESS AGREEMENTS
Control: The organization:
a. Ensures that individuals requiring access to organizational information and information
systems sign appropriate access agreements prior to being granted access; and
b. Reviews/updates the access agreements [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Supplemental Guidance: Access agreements include, for example, nondisclosure agreements,
acceptable use agreements, rules of behavior, and conflict-of-interest agreements. Signed access
agreements include an acknowledgement that individuals have read, understand, and agree to
abide by the constraints associated with the information system to which access is authorized.
Electronic signatures are acceptable for use in acknowledging access agreements unless
specifically prohibited by organizational policy. Related control: PL-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization ensures that access to information with special protection measures is granted
only to individuals who:
(a) Have a valid access authorization that is demonstrated by assigned official government
duties; and
(b) Satisfy associated personnel security criteria.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Information with special protection measures includes,
for example, privacy information, proprietary information, and Sources and Methods
Information (SAMI). Personnel security criteria include, for example, position sensitivity
background screening requirements.
(2) The organization ensures that access to classified information with special protection measures is
granted only to individuals who:
(a) Have a valid access authorization that is demonstrated by assigned official government
duties;
(b) Satisfy associated personnel security criteria; and
(c) Have read, understand, and signed a nondisclosure agreement.
APPENDIX F-PS PAGE F-90


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Examples of special protection measures include, for
example, collateral, Special Access Program (SAP) and Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI). Personnel security criteria are consistent with applicable federal laws,
Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW PS-6 MOD PS-6 HIGH PS-6
PS-7 THIRD-PARTY PERSONNEL SECURITY
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes personnel security requirements including security roles and responsibilities for
third-party providers;
b. Documents personnel security requirements; and
c. Monitors provider compliance.
Supplemental Guidance: Third-party providers include, for example, service bureaus, contractors,
and other organizations providing information system development, information technology
services, outsourced applications, and network and security management. The organization
explicitly includes personnel security requirements in acquisition-related documents.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-35.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW PS-7 MOD PS-7 HIGH PS-7
PS-8 PERSONNEL SANCTIONS
Control: The organization employs a formal sanctions process for personnel failing to comply with
established information security policies and procedures.
Supplemental Guidance: The sanctions process is consistent with applicable federal laws, Executive
Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. The process is described in
access agreements and can be included as part of the general personnel policies and procedures for
the organization. Related controls: PL-4, PS-6.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P3 LOW PS-8 MOD PS-8 HIGH PS-8
APPENDIX F-PS PAGE F-91


FAMILY: RISK ASSESSMENT CLASS: MANAGEMENT
RA-1 RISK ASSESSMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented risk assessment policy that addresses purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and
compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the risk assessment policy
and associated risk assessment controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the risk assessment family. The policy and procedures are consistent with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. Existing
organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional specific policies and
procedures unnecessary. The risk assessment policy can be included as part of the general
information security policy for the organization. Risk assessment procedures can be developed for
the security program in general and for a particular information system, when required. The
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in the development of the risk assessment
policy. Related control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-30,800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW RA-1 MOD RA-1 HIGH RA-1
RA-2 SECURITY CATEGORIZATION
Control: The organization:
a. Categorizes information and the information system in accordance with applicable federal
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance;
b. Documents the security categorization results (including supporting rationale) in the security
plan for the information system; and
c. Ensures the security categorization decision is reviewed and approved by the authorizing
official or authorizing official designated representative.
Supplemental Guidance: A clearly defined authorization boundary is a prerequisite for an effective
security categorization. Security categorization describes the potential adverse impacts to
organizational operations, organizational assets, and individuals should the information and
information system be comprised through a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability. The
organization conducts the security categorization process as an organization-wide activity with the
involvement of the chief information officer, senior information security officer, information
system owner, mission owners, and information owners/stewards. The organization also considers
potential adverse impacts to other organizations and, in accordance with the USA PATRIOT Act
of 2001 and Homeland Security Presidential Directives, potential national-level adverse impacts in
categorizing the information system. The security categorization process facilitates the creation of
an inventory of information assets, and in conjunction with CM-8, a mapping to the information
system components where the information is processed, stored, and transmitted. Related controls:
CM-8, MP-4, SC-7.
APPENDIX F-RA PAGE F-92


Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-30, 800-39, 800-60.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW RA-2 MOD RA-2 HIGH RA-2
RA-3 RISK ASSESSMENT
Control: The organization:
a. Conducts an assessment of risk, including the likelihood and magnitude of harm, from the
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the
information system and the information it processes, stores, or transmits;
b. Documents risk assessment results in [Selection: security plan; risk assessment report;
[Assignment: organization-defined document]];
c. Reviews risk assessment results [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
d. Updates the risk assessment [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] or whenever there
are significant changes to the information system or environment of operation (including the
identification of new threats and vulnerabilities), or other conditions that may impact the
security state of the system.
Supplemental Guidance: A clearly defined authorization boundary is a prerequisite for an effective
risk assessment. Risk assessments take into account vulnerabilities, threat sources, and security
controls planned or in place to determine the level of residual risk posed to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation based on the operation of
the information system. Risk assessments also take into account risk posed to organizational
operations, organizational assets, or individuals from external parties (e.g., service providers,
contractors operating information systems on behalf of the organization, individuals accessing
organizational information systems, outsourcing entities). In accordance with OMB policy and
related E-authentication initiatives, authentication of public users accessing federal information
systems may also be required to protect nonpublic or privacy-related information. As such,
organizational assessments of risk also address public access to federal information systems. The
General Services Administration provides tools supporting that portion of the risk assessment
dealing with public access to federal information systems.
Risk assessments (either formal or informal) can be conducted by organizations at various steps in
the Risk Management Framework including: information system categorization; security control
selection; security control implementation; security control assessment; information system
authorization; and security control monitoring. RA-3 is a noteworthy security control in that the
control must be partially implemented prior to the implementation of other controls in order to
complete the first two steps in the Risk Management Framework. Risk assessments can play an
important role in the security control selection process during the application of tailoring guidance
for security control baselines and when considering supplementing the tailored baselines with
additional security controls or control enhancements.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-30.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW RA-3 MOD RA-3 HIGH RA-3
APPENDIX F-RA PAGE F-93


RA-4 RISK ASSESSMENT UPDATE
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into RA-3].
RA-5 VULNERABILITY SCANNING
Control: The organization:
a. Scans for vulnerabilities in the information system and hosted applications [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency and/or randomly in accordance with organization-defined
process] and when new vulnerabilities potentially affecting the system/applications are
identified and reported;
b. Employs vulnerability scanning tools and techniques that promote interoperability among
tools and automate parts of the vulnerability management process by using standards for:
- Enumerating platforms, software flaws, and improper configurations;
- Formatting and making transparent, checklists and test procedures; and
- Measuring vulnerability impact;
c. Analyzes vulnerability scan reports and results from security control assessments;
d. Remediates legitimate vulnerabilities [Assignment: organization-defined response times] in
accordance with an organizational assessment of risk; and
e. Shares information obtained from the vulnerability scanning process and security control
assessments with designated personnel throughout the organization to help eliminate similar
vulnerabilities in other information systems (i.e., systemic weaknesses or deficiencies).
Supplemental Guidance: The security categorization of the information system guides the frequency
and comprehensiveness of the vulnerability scans. Vulnerability analysis for custom software and
applications may require additional, more specialized techniques and approaches (e.g., web-based
application scanners, source code reviews, source code analyzers). Vulnerability scanning
includes scanning for specific functions, ports, protocols, and services that should not be
accessible to users or devices and for improperly configured or incorrectly operating information
flow mechanisms. The organization considers using tools that express vulnerabilities in the
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) naming convention and that use the Open
Vulnerability Assessment Language (OVAL) to test for the presence of vulnerabilities. The
Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) and the National Vulnerability Database (NVD) are also
excellent sources for vulnerability information. In addition, security control assessments such as
red team exercises are another source of potential vulnerabilities for which to scan. Related
controls: CA-2, CM-6, RA-3, SI-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs vulnerability scanning tools that include the capability to readily update
the list of information system vulnerabilities scanned.
(2) The organization updates the list of information system vulnerabilities scanned [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] or when new vulnerabilities are identified and reported.
(3) The organization employs vulnerability scanning procedures that can demonstrate the breadth and
depth of coverage (i.e., information system components scanned and vulnerabilities checked).
(4) The organization attempts to discern what information about the information system is
discoverable by adversaries.
(5) The organization includes privileged access authorization to [Assignment: organization-identified
information system components] for selected vulnerability scanning activities to facilitate more
thorough scanning.
(6) The organization employs automated mechanisms to compare the results of vulnerability scans
over time to determine trends in information system vulnerabilities.
APPENDIX F-RA PAGE F-94


(7) The organization employs automated mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]
to detect the presence of unauthorized software on organizational information systems and notify
designated organizational officials.
(8) The organization reviews historic audit logs to determine if a vulnerability identified in the
information system has been previously exploited.
(9) The organization employs an independent penetration agent or penetration team to:
(a) Conduct a vulnerability analysis on the information system; and
(b) Perform penetration testing on the information system based on the vulnerability analysis to
determine the exploitability of identified vulnerabilities.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: A standard method for penetration testing includes: (i)
pre-test analysis based on full knowledge of the target information system; (ii) pre-test
identification of potential vulnerabilities based on pre-test analysis; and (iii) testing designed
to determine exploitability of identified vulnerabilities. Detailed rules of engagement are
agreed upon by all parties before the commencement of any penetration testing scenario.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-40, 800-70, 800-115; Web: CWE.MITRE.ORG;
NVD.NIST.GOV.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW RA-5 MOD RA-5 (1) HIGH RA-5 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (7)
APPENDIX F-RA PAGE F-95


FAMILY: SYSTEM AND SERVICES ACQUISITION CLASS: MANAGEMENT
SA-1 SYSTEM AND SERVICES ACQUISITION POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented system and services acquisition policy that includes information
security considerations and that addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management
commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the system and services
acquisition policy and associated system and services acquisition controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the system and services acquisition family. The policy and procedures are consistent with
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The system and services acquisition policy can be
included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. System and
services acquisition procedures can be developed for the security program in general and for a
particular information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy is a
key factor in the development of the system and services acquisition policy. Related control: PM-
9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-1 MOD SA-1 HIGH SA-1
SA-2 ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES
Control: The organization:
a. Includes a determination of information security requirements for the information system in
mission/business process planning;
b. Determines, documents, and allocates the resources required to protect the information system
as part of its capital planning and investment control process; and
c. Establishes a discrete line item for information security in organizational programming and
budgeting documentation.
Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: PM-3, PM-11.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-65.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-2 MOD SA-2 HIGH SA-2
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-96


SA-3 LIFE CYCLE SUPPORT
Control: The organization:
a. Manages the information system using a system development life cycle methodology that
includes information security considerations;
b. Defines and documents information system security roles and responsibilities throughout the
system development life cycle; and
c. Identifies individuals having information system security roles and responsibilities.
Supplemental Guidance: Related control: PM-7.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-64.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-3 MOD SA-3 HIGH SA-3
SA-4 ACQUISITIONS
Control: The organization includes the following requirements and/or specifications, explicitly or
by reference, in information system acquisition contracts based on an assessment of risk and in
accordance with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, and
standards:
a. Security functional requirements/specifications;
b. Security-related documentation requirements; and
c. Developmental and evaluation-related assurance requirements.
Supplemental Guidance: The acquisition documents for information systems, information system
components, and information system services include, either explicitly or by reference, security
requirements that describe: (i) required security capabilities (i.e., security needs and, as necessary,
specific security controls and other specific FISMA requirements); (ii) required design and
development processes; (iii) required test and evaluation procedures; and (iv) required
documentation. The requirements in the acquisition documents permit updating security controls
as new threats/vulnerabilities are identified and as new technologies are implemented. Acquisition
documents also include requirements for appropriate information system documentation. The
documentation addresses user and system administrator guidance and information regarding the
implementation of the security controls in the information system. The level of detail required in
the documentation is based on the security categorization for the information system. In addition,
the required documentation includes security configuration settings and security implementation
guidance. FISMA reporting instructions provide guidance on configuration requirements for
federal information systems.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization requires in acquisition documents that vendors/contractors provide information
describing the functional properties of the security controls to be employed within the information
system, information system components, or information system services in sufficient detail to
permit analysis and testing of the controls.
(2) The organization requires in acquisition documents that vendors/contractors provide information
describing the design and implementation details of the security controls to be employed within
the information system, information system components, or information system services
(including functional interfaces among control components) in sufficient detail to permit analysis
and testing of the controls.
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-97


(3) The organization requires software vendors/manufacturers to demonstrate that their software
development processes employ state-of-the-practice software and security engineering methods,
quality control processes, and validation techniques to minimize flawed or malformed software.
(4) The organization ensures that each information system component acquired is explicitly assigned
to an information system, and that the owner of the system acknowledges this assignment.
(5) The organization requires in acquisition documents, that information system components are
delivered in a secure, documented configuration, and that the secure configuration is the default
configuration for any software reinstalls or upgrades.
(6) The organization:
(a) Employs only government off-the-shelf (GOTS) or commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
information assurance (IA) and IA-enabled information technology products that composes an
NSA-approved solution to protect classified information when the networks used to transmit
the information are at a lower classification level than the information being transmitted; and
(b) Ensures that these products have been evaluated and/or validated by the NSA or in
accordance with NSA-approved procedures.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: COTS IA or IA-enabled information technology products
used to protect classified information by cryptographic means, may be required to use NSAapproved
key management.
(7) The organization:
(a) Limits the use of commercially provided information technology products to those products
that have been successfully evaluated against a validated U.S. Government Protection Profile
for a specific technology type, if such a profile exists; and
(b) Requires, if no U.S. Government Protection Profile exists for a specific technology type but a
commercially provided information technology product relies on cryptographic functionality
to enforce its security policy, then the cryptographic module is FIPS-validated.
References: ISO/IEC 15408; FIPS 140-2; NIST Special Publications 800-23, 800-35, 800-36, 800-
64, 800-70; Web: WWW.NIAP-CCEVS.ORG.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-4 MOD SA-4 (1) (4) HIGH SA-4 (1) (2) (4)
SA-5 INFORMATION SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION
Control: The organization:
a. Obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel, administrator
documentation for the information system that describes:
- Secure configuration, installation, and operation of the information system;
- Effective use and maintenance of security features/functions; and
- Known vulnerabilities regarding configuration and use of administrative (i.e., privileged)
functions; and
b. Obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel, user
documentation for the information system that describes:
- User-accessible security features/functions and how to effectively use those security
features/functions;
- Methods for user interaction with the information system, which enables individuals to
use the system in a more secure manner; and
- User responsibilities in maintaining the security of the information and information
system; and
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-98


c. Documents attempts to obtain information system documentation when such documentation is
either unavailable or nonexistent.
Supplemental Guidance: The inability of the organization to obtain necessary information system
documentation may occur, for example, due to the age of the system and/or lack of support from
the vendor/contractor. In those situations, organizations may need to recreate selected information
system documentation if such documentation is essential to the effective implementation and/or
operation of security controls.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel,
vendor/manufacturer documentation that describes the functional properties of the security
controls employed within the information system with sufficient detail to permit analysis and
testing.
(2) The organization obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel,
vendor/manufacturer documentation that describes the security-relevant external interfaces to the
information system with sufficient detail to permit analysis and testing.
(3) The organization obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel,
vendor/manufacturer documentation that describes the high-level design of the information system
in terms of subsystems and implementation details of the security controls employed within the
system with sufficient detail to permit analysis and testing.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An information system can be partitioned into multiple
subsystems.
(4) The organization obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel,
vendor/manufacturer documentation that describes the low-level design of the information system
in terms of modules and implementation details of the security controls employed within the
system with sufficient detail to permit analysis and testing.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Each subsystem within an information system can contain
one or more modules.
(5) The organization obtains, protects as required, and makes available to authorized personnel, the
source code for the information system to permit analysis and testing.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW SA-5 MOD SA-5 (1) (3) HIGH SA-5 (1) (2) (3)
SA-6 SOFTWARE USAGE RESTRICTIONS
Control: The organization:
a. Uses software and associated documentation in accordance with contract agreements and
copyright laws;
b. Employs tracking systems for software and associated documentation protected by quantity
licenses to control copying and distribution; and
c. Controls and documents the use of peer-to-peer file sharing technology to ensure that this
capability is not used for the unauthorized distribution, display, performance, or reproduction
of copyrighted work.
Supplemental Guidance: Tracking systems can include, for example, simple spreadsheets or fully
automated, specialized applications depending on the needs of the organization.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization:
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-99


(a) Prohibits the use of binary or machine executable code from sources with limited or no
warranty without accompanying source code; and
(b) Provides exceptions to the source code requirement only for compelling mission/operational
requirements when no alternative solutions are available and with the express written consent
of the authorizing official.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Software products without accompanying source code
from sources with limited or no warranty are assessed for potential security impacts. The
assessment addresses the fact that these types of software products are difficult or impossible
to review, repair, or extend, given that the organization does not have access to the original
source code and there is no owner who could make such repairs on behalf of the organization.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-6 MOD SA-6 HIGH SA-6
SA-7 USER-INSTALLED SOFTWARE
Control: The organization enforces explicit rules governing the installation of software by users.
Supplemental Guidance: If provided the necessary privileges, users have the ability to install
software. The organization identifies what types of software installations are permitted (e.g.,
updates and security patches to existing software) and what types of installations are prohibited
(e.g., software whose pedigree with regard to being potentially malicious is unknown or suspect).
Related control: CM-2.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-7 MOD SA-7 HIGH SA-7
SA-8 SECURITY ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES
Control: The organization applies information system security engineering principles in the
specification, design, development, implementation, and modification of the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: The application of security engineering principles is primarily targeted at
new development information systems or systems undergoing major upgrades and is integrated
into the system development life cycle. For legacy information systems, the organization applies
security engineering principles to system upgrades and modifications to the extent feasible, given
the current state of the hardware, software, and firmware within the system. Examples of security
engineering principles include, for example: (i) developing layered protections; (ii) establishing
sound security policy, architecture, and controls as the foundation for design; (iii) incorporating
security into the system development life cycle; (iv) delineating physical and logical security
boundaries; (v) ensuring system developers and integrators are trained on how to develop secure
software; (vi) tailoring security controls to meet organizational and operational needs; and (vii)
reducing risk to acceptable levels, thus enabling informed risk management decisions.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-27.
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-100


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SA-8 HIGH SA-8
SA-9 EXTERNAL INFORMATION SYSTEM SERVICES
Control: The organization:
a. Requires that providers of external information system services comply with organizational
information security requirements and employ appropriate security controls in accordance
with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards,
and guidance;
b. Defines and documents government oversight and user roles and responsibilities with regard
to external information system services; and
c. Monitors security control compliance by external service providers.
Supplemental Guidance: An external information system service is a service that is implemented
outside of the authorization boundary of the organizational information system (i.e., a service that
is used by, but not a part of, the organizational information system). Relationships with external
service providers are established in a variety of ways, for example, through joint ventures,
business partnerships, outsourcing arrangements (i.e., contracts, interagency agreements, lines of
business arrangements), licensing agreements, and/or supply chain exchanges. The responsibility
for adequately mitigating risks arising from the use of external information system services
remains with the authorizing official. Authorizing officials require that an appropriate chain of
trust be established with external service providers when dealing with the many issues associated
with information security. For services external to the organization, a chain of trust requires that
the organization establish and retain a level of confidence that each participating provider in the
potentially complex consumer-provider relationship provides adequate protection for the services
rendered to the organization. The extent and nature of this chain of trust varies based on the
relationship between the organization and the external provider. Where a sufficient level of trust
cannot be established in the external services and/or service providers, the organization employs
compensating security controls or accepts the greater degree of risk. The external information
system services documentation includes government, service provider, and end user security roles
and responsibilities, and any service-level agreements. Service-level agreements define the
expectations of performance for each required security control, describe measurable outcomes,
and identify remedies and response requirements for any identified instance of noncompliance.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization:
(a) Conducts an organizational assessment of risk prior to the acquisition or outsourcing of
dedicated information security services; and
(b) Ensures that the acquisition or outsourcing of dedicated information security services is
approved by [Assignment: organization-defined senior organizational official].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Dedicated information security services include, for
example, incident monitoring, analysis and response, operation of information security-related
devices such as firewalls, or key management services.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-35.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SA-9 MOD SA-9 HIGH SA-9
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-101


SA-10 DEVELOPER CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
Control: The organization requires that information system developers/integrators:
a. Perform configuration management during information system design, development,
implementation, and operation;
b. Manage and control changes to the information system;
c. Implement only organization-approved changes;
d. Document approved changes to the information system; and
e. Track security flaws and flaw resolution.
Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: CM-3, CM-4, CM-9.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization requires that information system developers/integrators provide an integrity
check of software to facilitate organizational verification of software integrity after delivery.
(2) The organization provides an alternative configuration management process with organizational
personnel in the absence of dedicated developer/integrator configuration management team.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The configuration management process includes key
organizational personnel that are responsible for reviewing and approving proposed changes
to the information system, and security personnel that conduct impact analyses prior to the
implementation of any changes to the system.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SA-10 HIGH SA-10
SA-11 DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING
Control: The organization requires that information system developers/integrators, in consultation
with associated security personnel (including security engineers):
a. Create and implement a security test and evaluation plan;
b. Implement a verifiable flaw remediation process to correct weaknesses and deficiencies
identified during the security testing and evaluation process; and
c. Document the results of the security testing/evaluation and flaw remediation processes.
Supplemental Guidance: Developmental security test results are used to the greatest extent feasible
after verification of the results and recognizing that these results are impacted whenever there have
been security-relevant modifications to the information system subsequent to developer testing.
Test results may be used in support of the security authorization process for the delivered
information system. Related control: CA-2, SI-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization requires that information system developers/integrators employ code analysis
tools to examine software for common flaws and document the results of the analysis.
(2) The organization requires that information system developers/integrators perform a vulnerability
analysis to document vulnerabilities, exploitation potential, and risk mitigations.
(3) The organization requires that information system developers/integrators create a security test and
evaluation plan and implement the plan under the witness of an independent verification and
validation agent.
References: None.
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-102


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD SA-11 HIGH SA-11
SA-12 SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION
Control: The organization protects against supply chain threats by employing: [Assignment:
organization-defined list of measures to protect against supply chain threats] as part of a
comprehensive, defense-in-breadth information security strategy.
Supplemental Guidance: A defense-in-breadth approach helps to protect information systems
(including the information technology products that compose those systems) throughout the
system development life cycle (i.e., during design and development, manufacturing, packaging,
assembly, distribution, system integration, operations, maintenance, and retirement). This is
accomplished by the identification, management, and elimination of vulnerabilities at each phase
of the life cycle and the use of complementary, mutually reinforcing strategies to mitigate risk.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization purchases all anticipated information system components and spares in the
initial acquisition.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Stockpiling information system components and spares
avoids the need to use less trustworthy secondary or resale markets in future years.
(2) The organization conducts a due diligence review of suppliers prior to entering into contractual
agreements to acquire information system hardware, software, firmware, or services.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The organization reviews supplier claims with regard to
the use of appropriate security processes in the development and manufacture of information
system components or products.
(3) The organization uses trusted shipping and warehousing for information systems, information
system components, and information technology products.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Trusted shipping and warehousing reduces opportunities
for subversive activities or interception during transit. Examples of supporting techniques
include the use of a geographically aware beacon to detect shipment diversions or delays.
Related control: PE-16.
(4) The organization employs a diverse set of suppliers for information systems, information system
components, information technology products, and information system services.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Diversification of suppliers is intended to limit the
potential harm from a given supplier in a supply chain, increasing the work factor for an
adversary.
(5) The organization employs standard configurations for information systems, information system
components, and information technology products.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: By avoiding the purchase of custom configurations for
information systems, information system components, and information technology products,
the organization limits the possibility of acquiring systems and products that have been
corrupted via the supply chain actions targeted at the organization.
(6) The organization minimizes the time between purchase decisions and delivery of information
systems, information system components, and information technology products.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: By minimizing the time between purchase decisions and
required delivery of information systems, information system components, and information
technology products, the organization limits the opportunity for an adversary to corrupt the
purchased system, component, or product.
(7) The organization employs independent analysis and penetration testing against delivered
information systems, information system components, and information technology products.
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-103


References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH SA-12
SA-13 TRUSTWORTHINESS
Control: The organization requires that the information system meets [Assignment: organizationdefined
level of trustworthiness].
Supplemental Guidance: The intent of this control is to ensure that organizations recognize the
importance of trustworthiness and making explicit trustworthiness decisions when designing,
developing, and implementing organizational information systems. Trustworthiness is a
characteristic or property of an information system that expresses the degree to which the system
can be expected to preserve the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the information being
processed, stored, or transmitted by the system. Trustworthy information systems are systems that
are capable of being trusted to operate within defined levels of risk despite the environmental
disruptions, human errors, and purposeful attacks that are expected to occur in the specified
environments of operation. Two factors affecting the trustworthiness of an information system
include: (i) security functionality (i.e., the security features or functions employed within the
system); and (ii) security assurance (i.e., the grounds for confidence that the security functionality
is effective in its application).
Appropriate security functionality for the information system can be obtained by using the Risk
Management Framework (Steps 1, 2, and 3) to select and implement the necessary management,
operational, and technical security controls necessary to mitigate risk to organizational operations
and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Appropriate security assurance can be
obtained by: (i) the actions taken by developers and implementers of security controls with regard
to the design, development, implementation, and operation of those controls; and (ii) the actions
taken by assessors to determine the extent to which the controls are implemented correctly,
operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security
requirements for the information system.
Developers and implementers can increase the assurance in security controls by employing welldefined
security policy models, structured, disciplined, and rigorous hardware and software
development techniques, and sound system/security engineering principles. Assurance is also
based on the assessment of evidence produced during the initiation, acquisition/development,
implementation, and operations/maintenance phases of the system development life cycle. For
example, developmental evidence may include the techniques and methods used to design and
develop security functionality. Operational evidence may include flaw reporting and remediation,
the results of security incident reporting, and the results of the ongoing monitoring of security
controls. Independent assessments by qualified assessors may include analyses of the evidence as
well as testing, inspections, and audits. Minimum assurance requirements are described in
Appendix E.
Explicit trustworthiness decisions highlight situations where achieving the information system
resilience and security capability necessary to withstand cyber attacks from adversaries with
certain threat capabilities may require adjusting the risk management strategy, the design of
mission/business processes with regard to automation, the selection and implementation rigor of
management and operational protections, or the selection of information technology components
with higher levels of trustworthiness. Trustworthiness may be defined on a component-bycomponent,
subsystem-by-subsystem, or function-by-function basis. It is noted, however, that
typically functions, subsystems, and components are highly interrelated, making separation by
trustworthiness perhaps problematic and at a minimum, something that likely requires careful
attention in order to achieve practically useful results. Related controls: RA-2, SA-4, SA-8, SC-3.
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-104


Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publications 199, 200; NIST Special Publications 800-53, 800-53A, 800-60,
800-64.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH SA-13
SA-14 CRITICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Control: The organization:
a. Determines [Assignment: organization-defined list of critical information system components
that require re-implementation]; and
b. Re-implements or custom develops such information system components.
Supplemental Guidance: The underlying assumption is that the list of information technology
products defined by the organization cannot be trusted due to threats from the supply chain that the
organization finds unacceptable. The organization re-implements or custom develops such
components to satisfy requirements for high assurance. Related controls: SA-12, SA-13.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization:
(a) Identifies information system components for which alternative sourcing is not viable; and
(b) Employs [Assignment: organization-defined measures] to ensure that critical security controls
for the information system components are not compromised.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Measures that the organization considers implementing
include, for example, enhanced auditing, restrictions on source code and system utility access,
and protection from deletion of system and application files.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
APPENDIX F-SA PAGE F-105


FAMILY: SYSTEM AND COMMUNICATIONS PROTECTION CLASS: TECHNICAL
SC-1 SYSTEM AND COMMUNICATIONS PROTECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented system and communications protection policy that addresses purpose,
scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational
entities, and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the system and
communications protection policy and associated system and communications protection
controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the system and communications protection family. The policy and procedures are consistent
with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The system and communications protection policy
can be included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. System and
communications protection procedures can be developed for the security program in general and
for a particular information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy
is a key factor in the development of the system and communications protection policy. Related
control: PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-1 MOD SC-1 HIGH SC-1
SC-2 APPLICATION PARTITIONING
Control: The information system separates user functionality (including user interface services)
from information system management functionality.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system management functionality includes, for example,
functions necessary to administer databases, network components, workstations, or servers, and
typically requires privileged user access. The separation of user functionality from information
system management functionality is either physical or logical and is accomplished by using
different computers, different central processing units, different instances of the operating system,
different network addresses, combinations of these methods, or other methods as appropriate. An
example of this type of separation is observed in web administrative interfaces that use separate
authentication methods for users of any other information system resources. This may include
isolating the administrative interface on a different domain and with additional access controls.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system prevents the presentation of information system management-related
functionality at an interface for general (i.e., non-privileged) users.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The intent of this control enhancement is to ensure that
administration options are not available to general users (including prohibiting the use of the
grey-out option commonly used to eliminate accessibility to such information). For example,
administration options are not presented until the user has appropriately established a session
with administrator privileges.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-106


References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-2 HIGH SC-2
SC-3 SECURITY FUNCTION ISOLATION
Control: The information system isolates security functions from nonsecurity functions.
Supplemental Guidance: The information system isolates security functions from nonsecurity
functions by means of an isolation boundary (implemented via partitions and domains) that
controls access to and protects the integrity of, the hardware, software, and firmware that perform
those security functions. The information system maintains a separate execution domain (e.g.,
address space) for each executing process. Related control: SA-13.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system implements underlying hardware separation mechanisms to facilitate
security function isolation.
(2) The information system isolates security functions enforcing access and information flow control
from both nonsecurity functions and from other security functions.
(3) The organization implements an information system isolation boundary to minimize the number of
nonsecurity functions included within the boundary containing security functions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Nonsecurity functions contained within the isolation
boundary are considered security-relevant.
(4) The organization implements security functions as largely independent modules that avoid
unnecessary interactions between modules.
(5) The organization implements security functions as a layered structure minimizing interactions
between layers of the design and avoiding any dependence by lower layers on the functionality or
correctness of higher layers.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH SC-3
SC-4 INFORMATION IN SHARED RESOURCES
Control: The information system prevents unauthorized and unintended information transfer via
shared system resources.
Supplemental Guidance: The purpose of this control is to prevent information, including encrypted
representations of information, produced by the actions of a prior user/role (or the actions of a
process acting on behalf of a prior user/role) from being available to any current user/role (or
current process) that obtains access to a shared system resource (e.g., registers, main memory,
secondary storage) after that resource has been released back to the information system. Control of
information in shared resources is also referred to as object reuse. This control does not address:
(i) information remanence which refers to residual representation of data that has been in some
way nominally erased or removed; (ii) covert channels where shared resources are manipulated to
achieve a violation of information flow restrictions; or (iii) components in the information system
for which there is only a single user/role.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system does not share resources that are used to interface with systems
operating at different security levels.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-107


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Shared resources include, for example, memory,
input/output queues, and network interface cards.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-4 HIGH SC-4
SC-5 DENIAL OF SERVICE PROTECTION
Control: The information system protects against or limits the effects of the following types of
denial of service attacks: [Assignment: organization-defined list of types of denial of service
attacks or reference to source for current list].
Supplemental Guidance: A variety of technologies exist to limit, or in some cases, eliminate the
effects of denial of service attacks. For example, boundary protection devices can filter certain
types of packets to protect devices on an organization’s internal network from being directly
affected by denial of service attacks. Employing increased capacity and bandwidth combined with
service redundancy may reduce the susceptibility to some denial of service attacks. Related
control: SC-7.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system restricts the ability of users to launch denial of service attacks against
other information systems or networks.
(2) The information system manages excess capacity, bandwidth, or other redundancy to limit the
effects of information flooding types of denial of service attacks.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-5 MOD SC-5 HIGH SC-5
SC-6 RESOURCE PRIORITY
Control: The information system limits the use of resources by priority.
Supplemental Guidance: Priority protection helps prevent a lower-priority process from delaying or
interfering with the information system servicing any higher-priority process. This control does
not apply to components in the information system for which there is only a single user/role.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-7 BOUNDARY PROTECTION
Control: The information system:
a. Monitors and controls communications at the external boundary of the system and at key
internal boundaries within the system; and
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-108


b. Connects to external networks or information systems only through managed interfaces
consisting of boundary protection devices arranged in accordance with an organizational
security architecture.
Supplemental Guidance: Restricting external web traffic only to organizational web servers within
managed interfaces and prohibiting external traffic that appears to be spoofing an internal address
as the source are examples of restricting and prohibiting communications. Managed interfaces
employing boundary protection devices include, for example, proxies, gateways, routers, firewalls,
guards, or encrypted tunnels arranged in an effective security architecture (e.g., routers protecting
firewalls and application gateways residing on a protected subnetwork commonly referred to as a
demilitarized zone or DMZ).
The organization considers the intrinsically shared nature of commercial telecommunications
services in the implementation of security controls associated with the use of such services.
Commercial telecommunications services are commonly based on network components and
consolidated management systems shared by all attached commercial customers, and may include
third-party provided access lines and other service elements. Consequently, such interconnecting
transmission services may represent sources of increased risk despite contract security provisions.
Therefore, when this situation occurs, the organization either implements appropriate
compensating security controls or explicitly accepts the additional risk. Related controls: AC-4,
IR-4, SC-5.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization physically allocates publicly accessible information system components to
separate subnetworks with separate physical network interfaces.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Publicly accessible information system components
include, for example, public web servers.
(2) The information system prevents public access into the organization’s internal networks except as
appropriately mediated by managed interfaces employing boundary protection devices.
(3) The organization limits the number of access points to the information system to allow for more
comprehensive monitoring of inbound and outbound communications and network traffic.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The Trusted Internet Connection (TIC) initiative is an
example of limiting the number of managed network access points.
(4) The organization:
(a) Implements a managed interface for each external telecommunication service;
(b) Establishes a traffic flow policy for each managed interface;
(c) Employs security controls as needed to protect the confidentiality and integrity of the
information being transmitted;
(d) Documents each exception to the traffic flow policy with a supporting mission/business need
and duration of that need;
(e) Reviews exceptions to the traffic flow policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
and
(f) Removes traffic flow policy exceptions that are no longer supported by an explicit
mission/business need.
(5) The information system at managed interfaces, denies network traffic by default and allows
network traffic by exception (i.e., deny all, permit by exception).
(6) The organization prevents the unauthorized release of information outside of the information
system boundary or any unauthorized communication through the information system boundary
when there is an operational failure of the boundary protection mechanisms.
(7) The information system prevents remote devices that have established a non-remote connection
with the system from communicating outside of that communications path with resources in
external networks.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is implemented within the
remote device (e.g., notebook/laptop computer) via configuration settings that are not
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-109


configurable by the user of that device. An example of a non-remote communications path
from a remote device is a virtual private network. When a non-remote connection is
established using a virtual private network, the configuration settings prevent split-tunneling.
Split tunneling might otherwise be used by remote users to communicate with the information
system as an extension of that system and to communicate with local resources such as a
printer or file server. Since the remote device, when connected by a non-remote connection,
becomes an extension of the information system, allowing dual communications paths such as
split-tunneling would be, in effect, allowing unauthorized external connections into the
system.
(8) The information system routes [Assignment: organization-defined internal communications traffic]
to [Assignment: organization-defined external networks] through authenticated proxy servers
within the managed interfaces of boundary protection devices.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: External networks are networks outside the control of the
organization. Proxy servers support logging individual Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
sessions and blocking specific Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), domain names, and
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. Proxy servers are also configurable with organizationdefined
lists of authorized and unauthorized websites.
(9) The information system, at managed interfaces, denies network traffic and audits internal users (or
malicious code) posing a threat to external information systems.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Detecting internal actions that may pose a security threat
to external information systems is sometimes termed extrusion detection. Extrusion detection
at the information system boundary includes the analysis of network traffic (incoming as well
as outgoing) looking for indications of an internal threat to the security of external systems.
(10) The organization prevents the unauthorized exfiltration of information across managed interfaces.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Measures to prevent unauthorized exfiltration of
information from the information system include, for example: (i) strict adherence to protocol
formats; (ii) monitoring for indications of beaconing from the information system; (iii)
monitoring for use of steganography; (iv) disconnecting external network interfaces except
when explicitly needed; (v) disassembling and reassembling packet headers; and (vi)
employing traffic profile analysis to detect deviations from the volume or types of traffic
expected within the organization. Examples of devices enforcing strict adherence to protocol
formats include, for example, deep packet inspection firewalls and XML gateways. These
devices verify adherence to the protocol specification at the application layer and serve to
identify vulnerabilities that cannot be detected by devices operating at the network or
transport layer.
(11) The information system checks incoming communications to ensure that the communications are
coming from an authorized source and routed to an authorized destination.
(12) The information system implements host-based boundary protection mechanisms for servers,
workstations, and mobile devices.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: A host-based boundary protection mechanism is, for
example, a host-based firewall. Host-based boundary protection mechanisms are employed
on mobile devices, such as notebook/laptop computers, and other types of mobile devices
where such boundary protection mechanisms are available.
(13) The organization isolates [Assignment: organization defined key information security tools,
mechanisms, and support components] from other internal information system components via
physically separate subnets with managed interfaces to other portions of the system.
(14) The organization protects against unauthorized physical connections across the boundary
protections implemented at [Assignment: organization-defined list of managed interfaces].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Information systems operating at different security
categories may routinely share common physical and environmental controls, since the
systems may share space within organizational facilities. In practice, it is possible that these
separate information systems may share common equipment rooms, wiring closets, and cable
distribution paths. Protection against unauthorized physical connections can be achieved, for
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-110


example, by employing clearly identified and physically separated cable trays, connection
frames, and patch panels for each side of managed interfaces with physical access controls
enforcing limited authorized access to these items. Related control: PE-4.
(15) The information system routes all networked, privileged accesses through a dedicated, managed
interface for purposes of access control and auditing.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Related controls: AC-2, AC-3, AC-4, AU-2.
(16) The information system prevents discovery of specific system components (or devices)
composing a managed interface.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement is intended to protect the
network addresses of information system components that are part of the managed interface
from discovery through common tools and techniques used to identify devices on a network.
The network addresses are not available for discovery (e.g., not published or entered in the
domain name system), requiring prior knowledge for access. Another obfuscation technique
is to periodically change network addresses.
(17) The organization employs automated mechanisms to enforce strict adherence to protocol format.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Automated mechanisms used to enforce protocol formats
include, for example, deep packet inspection firewalls and XML gateways. These devices
verify adherence to the protocol specification (e.g., IEEE) at the application layer and serve to
identify significant vulnerabilities that cannot be detected by devices operating at the network
or transport layer.
(18) The information system fails securely in the event of an operational failure of a boundary
protection device.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Fail secure is a condition achieved by the application of a
set of information system mechanisms to ensure that in the event of an operational failure of a
boundary protection device at a managed interface (e.g., router, firewall, guard, application
gateway residing on a protected subnetwork commonly referred to as a demilitarized zone),
the system does not enter into an unsecure state where intended security properties no longer
hold. A failure of a boundary protection device cannot lead to, or cause information external
to the boundary protection device to enter the device, nor can a failure permit unauthorized
information release.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-41, 800-77.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-7 MOD SC-7 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (7) HIGH SC-7 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
SC-8 TRANSMISSION INTEGRITY
Control: The information system protects the integrity of transmitted information.
Supplemental Guidance: This control applies to communications across internal and external
networks. If the organization is relying on a commercial service provider for transmission
services as a commodity item rather than a fully dedicated service, it may be more difficult to
obtain the necessary assurances regarding the implementation of needed security controls for
transmission integrity. When it is infeasible or impractical to obtain the necessary security
controls and assurances of control effectiveness through appropriate contracting vehicles, the
organization either implements appropriate compensating security controls or explicitly accepts
the additional risk. Related controls: AC-17, PE-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs cryptographic mechanisms to recognize changes to information during
transmission unless otherwise protected by alternative physical measures.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-111


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Alternative physical protection measures include, for
example, protected distribution systems. Related control: SC-13.
(2) The information system maintains the integrity of information during aggregation, packaging, and
transformation in preparation for transmission.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Information can be intentionally and/or maliciously
modified at data aggregation or protocol transformation points, compromising the integrity of
the information.
References: FIPS Publications 140-2, 197; NIST Special Publications 800-52, 800-77, 800-81,
800-113; NSTISSI No. 7003.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-8 (1) HIGH SC-8 (1)
SC-9 TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY
Control: The information system protects the confidentiality of transmitted information.
Supplemental Guidance: This control applies to communications across internal and external
networks. If the organization is relying on a commercial service provider for transmission
services as a commodity item rather than a fully dedicated service, it may be more difficult to
obtain the necessary assurances regarding the implementation of needed security controls for
transmission confidentiality. When it is infeasible or impractical to obtain the necessary security
controls and assurances of control effectiveness through appropriate contracting vehicles, the
organization either implements appropriate compensating security controls or explicitly accepts
the additional risk. Related controls: AC-17, PE-4.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs cryptographic mechanisms to prevent unauthorized disclosure of
information during transmission unless otherwise protected by [Assignment: organization-defined
alternative physical measures].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Alternative physical protection measures include, for
example, protected distribution systems. Related control: SC-13.
(2) The information system maintains the confidentiality of information during aggregation, packaging,
and transformation in preparation for transmission.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Information can be intentionally and/or maliciously
disclosed at data aggregation or protocol transformation points, compromising the
confidentiality of the information.
References: FIPS Publications 140-2, 197; NIST Special Publications 800-52, 800-77, 800-113;
CNSS Policy 15; NSTISSI No. 7003.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-9 (1) HIGH SC-9 (1)
SC-10 NETWORK DISCONNECT
Control: The information system terminates the network connection associated with a
communications session at the end of the session or after [Assignment: organization-defined time
period] of inactivity.
Supplemental Guidance: This control applies to both internal and external networks. Terminating
network connections associated with communications sessions include, for example, de-allocating
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-112


associated TCP/IP address/port pairs at the operating-system level, or de-allocating networking
assignments at the application level if multiple application sessions are using a single, operating
system-level network connection. The time period of inactivity may, as the organization deems
necessary, be a set of time periods by type of network access or for specific accesses.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-10 HIGH SC-10
SC-11 TRUSTED PATH
Control: The information system establishes a trusted communications path between the user and
the following security functions of the system: [Assignment: organization-defined security
functions to include at a minimum, information system authentication and reauthentication].
Supplemental Guidance: A trusted path is employed for high-confidence connections between the
security functions of the information system and the user (e.g., for login).
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-12 CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Control: The organization establishes and manages cryptographic keys for required cryptography
employed within the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: Cryptographic key management and establishment can be performed using
manual procedures or automated mechanisms with supporting manual procedures. In addition to
being required for the effective operation of a cryptographic mechanism, effective cryptographic
key management provides protections to maintain the availability of the information in the event
of the loss of cryptographic keys by users.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization maintains availability of information in the event of the loss of cryptographic keys
by users.
(2) The organization produces, controls, and distributes symmetric cryptographic keys using
[Selection: NIST-approved, NSA-approved] key management technology and processes.
(3) The organization produces, controls, and distributes symmetric and asymmetric cryptographic
keys using NSA-approved key management technology and processes.
(4) The organization produces, controls, and distributes asymmetric cryptographic keys using
approved PKI Class 3 certificates or prepositioned keying material.
(5) The organization produces, controls, and distributes asymmetric cryptographic keys using
approved PKI Class 3 or Class 4 certificates and hardware security tokens that protect the user’s
private key.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-56, 800-57.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-113


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-12 MOD SC-12 HIGH SC-12 (1)
SC-13 USE OF CRYPTOGRAPHY
Control: The information system implements required cryptographic protections using
cryptographic modules that comply with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives,
policies, regulations, standards, and guidance.
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs, at a minimum, FIPS-validated cryptography to protect unclassified
information.
(2) The organization employs NSA-approved cryptography to protect classified information.
(3) The organization employs, at a minimum, FIPS-validated cryptography to protect information when
such information must be separated from individuals who have the necessary clearances yet lack
the necessary access approvals.
(4) The organization employs [Selection: FIPS-validated; NSA-approved] cryptography to implement
digital signatures.
References: FIPS Publication 140-2; Web: CSRC.NIST.GOV/CRYPTVAL, WWW.CNSS.GOV.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-13 MOD SC-13 HIGH SC-13
SC-14 PUBLIC ACCESS PROTECTIONS
Control: The information system protects the integrity and availability of publicly available
information and applications.
Supplemental Guidance: The purpose of this control is to ensure that organizations explicitly address
the protection needs for public information and applications with such protection likely being
implemented as part of other security controls.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-14 MOD SC-14 HIGH SC-14
SC-15 COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING DEVICES
Control: The information system:
a. Prohibits remote activation of collaborative computing devices with the following exceptions:
[Assignment: organization-defined exceptions where remote activation is to be allowed]; and
b. Provides an explicit indication of use to users physically present at the devices.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-114


Supplemental Guidance: Collaborative computing devices include, for example, networked white
boards, cameras, and microphones. Explicit indication of use includes, for example, signals to
users when collaborative computing devices are activated.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system provides physical disconnect of collaborative computing devices in a
manner that supports ease of use.
(2) The information system or supporting environment blocks both inbound and outbound traffic
between instant messaging clients that are independently configured by end users and external
service providers.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Blocking restrictions do not include instant messaging
services that are configured by an organization to perform an authorized function.
(3) The organization disables or removes collaborative computing devices from information systems
in [Assignment: organization-defined secure work areas].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-15 MOD SC-15 HIGH SC-15
SC-16 TRANSMISSION OF SECURITY ATTRIBUTES
Control: The information system associates security attributes with information exchanged between
information systems.
Supplemental Guidance: Security attributes may be explicitly or implicitly associated with the
information contained within the information system. Related control: AC-16.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system validates the integrity of security attributes exchanged between systems.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-17 PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE CERTIFICATES
Control: The organization issues public key certificates under an [Assignment: organizationdefined
certificate policy] or obtains public key certificates under an appropriate certificate policy
from an approved service provider.
Supplemental Guidance: For user certificates, each organization attains certificates from an
approved, shared service provider, as required by OMB policy. For federal agencies operating a
legacy public key infrastructure cross-certified with the Federal Bridge Certification Authority at
medium assurance or higher, this Certification Authority will suffice. This control focuses on
certificates with a visibility external to the information system and does not include certificates
related to internal system operations, for example, application-specific time services.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: OMB Memorandum 05-24; NIST Special Publications 800-32, 800-63.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-115


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-17 HIGH SC-17
SC-18 MOBILE CODE
Control: The organization:
a. Defines acceptable and unacceptable mobile code and mobile code technologies;
b. Establishes usage restrictions and implementation guidance for acceptable mobile code and
mobile code technologies; and
c. Authorizes, monitors, and controls the use of mobile code within the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: Decisions regarding the employment of mobile code within organizational
information systems are based on the potential for the code to cause damage to the system if used
maliciously. Mobile code technologies include, for example, Java, JavaScript, ActiveX, PDF,
Postscript, Shockwave movies, Flash animations, and VBScript. Usage restrictions and
implementation guidance apply to both the selection and use of mobile code installed on
organizational servers and mobile code downloaded and executed on individual workstations.
Policy and procedures related to mobile code, address preventing the development, acquisition, or
introduction of unacceptable mobile code within the information system.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system implements detection and inspection mechanisms to identify unauthorized
mobile code and takes corrective actions, when necessary.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Corrective actions when unauthorized mobile code is
detected include, for example, blocking, quarantine, or alerting administrator. Disallowed
transfers include, for example, sending word processing files with embedded macros.
(2) The organization ensures the acquisition, development, and/or use of mobile code to be deployed
in information systems meets [Assignment: organization-defined mobile code requirements].
(3) The information system prevents the download and execution of prohibited mobile code.
(4) The information system prevents the automatic execution of mobile code in [Assignment:
organization-defined software applications] and requires [Assignment: organization-defined
actions] prior to executing the code.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Actions required before executing mobile code, include,
for example, prompting users prior to opening electronic mail attachments.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-28; DOD Instruction 8552.01.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-18 HIGH SC-18
SC-19 VOICE OVER INTERNET PROTOCOL
Control: The organization:
a. Establishes usage restrictions and implementation guidance for Voice over Internet Protocol
(VoIP) technologies based on the potential to cause damage to the information system if used
maliciously; and
b. Authorizes, monitors, and controls the use of VoIP within the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: None.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-116


Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-58.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-19 HIGH SC-19
SC-20 SECURE NAME / ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE (AUTHORITATIVE SOURCE)
Control: The information system provides additional data origin and integrity artifacts along with
the authoritative data the system returns in response to name/address resolution queries.
Supplemental Guidance: This control enables remote clients to obtain origin authentication and
integrity verification assurances for the host/service name to network address resolution
information obtained through the service. A domain name system (DNS) server is an example of
an information system that provides name/address resolution service. Digital signatures and
cryptographic keys are examples of additional artifacts. DNS resource records are examples of
authoritative data. Information systems that use technologies other than the DNS to map between
host/service names and network addresses provide other means to assure the authenticity and
integrity of response data. The DNS security controls are consistent with, and referenced from,
OMB Memorandum 08-23.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system, when operating as part of a distributed, hierarchical namespace, provides
the means to indicate the security status of child subspaces and (if the child supports secure
resolution services) enable verification of a chain of trust among parent and child domains.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: An example means to indicate the security status of child
subspaces is through the use of delegation signer (DS) resource records in the DNS.
References: OMB Memorandum 08-23; NIST Special Publication 800-81.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SC-20 (1) MOD SC-20 (1) HIGH SC-20 (1)
SC-21 SECURE NAME / ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE (RECURSIVE OR CACHING RESOLVER)
Control: The information system performs data origin authentication and data integrity verification
on the name/address resolution responses the system receives from authoritative sources when
requested by client systems.
Supplemental Guidance: A recursive resolving or caching domain name system (DNS) server is an
example of an information system that provides name/address resolution service for local clients.
Authoritative DNS servers are examples of authoritative sources. Information systems that use
technologies other than the DNS to map between host/service names and network addresses
provide other means to enable clients to verify the authenticity and integrity of response data.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system performs data origin authentication and data integrity verification on all
resolution responses whether or not local clients explicitly request this service.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Local clients include, for example, DNS stub resolvers.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-81.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-117


Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH SC-21
SC-22 ARCHITECTURE AND PROVISIONING FOR NAME / ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE
Control: The information systems that collectively provide name/address resolution service for an
organization are fault-tolerant and implement internal/external role separation.
Supplemental Guidance: A domain name system (DNS) server is an example of an information
system that provides name/address resolution service. To eliminate single points of failure and to
enhance redundancy, there are typically at least two authoritative domain name system (DNS)
servers, one configured as primary and the other as secondary. Additionally, the two servers are
commonly located in two different network subnets and geographically separated (i.e., not located
in the same physical facility). With regard to role separation, DNS servers with an internal role,
only process name/address resolution requests from within the organization (i.e., internal clients).
DNS servers with an external role only process name/address resolution information requests from
clients external to the organization (i.e., on the external networks including the Internet). The set
of clients that can access an authoritative DNS server in a particular role is specified by the
organization (e.g., by address ranges, explicit lists).
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-81.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-22 HIGH SC-22
SC-23 SESSION AUTHENTICITY
Control: The information system provides mechanisms to protect the authenticity of
communications sessions.
Supplemental Guidance: This control focuses on communications protection at the session, versus
packet, level. The intent of this control is to establish grounds for confidence at each end of a
communications session in the ongoing identity of the other party and in the validity of the
information being transmitted. For example, this control addresses man-in-the-middle attacks
including session hijacking or insertion of false information into a session. This control is only
implemented where deemed necessary by the organization (e.g., sessions in service-oriented
architectures providing web-based services).
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system invalidates session identifiers upon user logout or other session
termination.
(2) The information system provides a readily observable logout capability whenever authentication is
used to gain access to web pages.
(3) The information system generates a unique session identifier for each session and recognizes only
session identifiers that are system-generated.
(4) The information system generates unique session identifiers with [Assignment: organizationdefined
randomness requirements].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Employing the concept of randomness in the generation
of unique session identifiers helps to protect against brute-force attacks to determine future
session identifiers.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-118


References: NIST Special Publications 800-52, 800-77, 800-95.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-23 HIGH SC-23
SC-24 FAIL IN KNOWN STATE
Control: The information system fails to a [Assignment: organization-defined known-state] for
[Assignment: organization-defined types of failures] preserving [Assignment: organization-defined
system state information] in failure.
Supplemental Guidance: Failure in a known state can address safety or security in accordance with
the mission/business needs of the organization. Failure in a known secure state helps prevent a
loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability in the event of a failure of the information system
or a component of the system. Failure in a known safe state helps prevent systems from failing to
a state that may cause injury to individuals or destruction to property. Preserving information
system state information facilitates system restart and return to the operational mode of the
organization with less disruption of mission/business processes.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH SC-24
SC-25 THIN NODES
Control: The information system employs processing components that have minimal functionality
and information storage.
Supplemental Guidance: The deployment of information system components with minimal
functionality (e.g., diskless nodes and thin client technologies) reduces the need to secure every
user endpoint, and may reduce the exposure of information, information systems, and services to a
successful attack. Related control: SC-30.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-26 HONEYPOTS
Control: The information system includes components specifically designed to be the target of
malicious attacks for the purpose of detecting, deflecting, and analyzing such attacks.
Supplemental Guidance: None.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system includes components that proactively seek to identify web-based
malicious code.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-119


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Devices that actively seek out web-based malicious code
by posing as clients are referred to as client honeypots or honey clients.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-27 OPERATING SYSTEM-INDEPENDENT APPLICATIONS
Control: The information system includes: [Assignment: organization-defined operating systemindependent
applications].
Supplemental Guidance: Operating system-independent applications are applications that can run on
multiple operating systems. Such applications promote portability and reconstitution on different
platform architectures, increasing the availability for critical functionality within an organization
while information systems with a given operating system are under attack.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-28 PROTECTION OF INFORMATION AT REST
Control: The information system protects the confidentiality and integrity of information at rest.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to address the confidentiality and integrity of
information at rest in nonmobile devices and covers user information and system information.
Information at rest refers to the state of information when it is located on a secondary storage
device (e.g., disk drive, tape drive) within an organizational information system. Configurations
and/or rule sets for firewalls, gateways, intrusion detection/prevention systems, and filtering
routers and authenticator content are examples of system information likely requiring protection.
Organizations may choose to employ different mechanisms to achieve confidentiality and integrity
protections, as appropriate.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs cryptographic mechanisms to prevent unauthorized disclosure and
modification of information at rest unless otherwise protected by alternative physical measures.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-56, 800-57, 800-111.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-28 HIGH SC-28
SC-29 HETEROGENEITY
Control: The organization employs diverse information technologies in the implementation of the
information system.
Supplemental Guidance: Increasing the diversity of information technologies within the information
system reduces the impact of the exploitation of a specific technology. Organizations that select
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-120


this control should consider that an increase in diversity may add complexity and management
overhead, both of which have the potential to lead to mistakes and misconfigurations which could
increase overall risk.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-30 VIRTUALIZATION TECHNIQUES
Control: The organization employs virtualization techniques to present information system
components as other types of components, or components with differing configurations.
Supplemental Guidance: Virtualization techniques provide organizations with the ability to disguise
information systems, potentially reducing the likelihood of successful attacks without the cost of
having multiple platforms.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs virtualization techniques to support the deployment of a diversity of
operating systems and applications that are changed [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: While frequent changes to operating systems and
applications pose configuration management challenges, the changes result in an increased
work factor for adversaries in order to carry out successful attacks. Changing the apparent
operating system or application, as opposed to the actual operating system or application,
results in virtual changes that still impede attacker success while helping to reduce the
configuration management effort.
(2) The organization employs randomness in the implementation of the virtualization techniques.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-31 COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS
Control: The organization requires that information system developers/integrators perform a covert
channel analysis to identify those aspects of system communication that are potential avenues for
covert storage and timing channels.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system developers/integrators are in the best position to
identify potential avenues within the system that might lead to covert channels. Covert channel
analysis is a meaningful activity when there is the potential for unauthorized information flows
across security domains, for example, in the case of information systems containing exportcontrolled
information and having connections to external networks (i.e., networks not controlled
by the organization). Covert channel analysis is also meaningful in the case of multilevel secure
(MLS) systems, multiple security level (MSL) systems, and cross domain systems.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization tests a subset of the vendor-identified covert channel avenues to determine if
they are exploitable.
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-121


References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-32 INFORMATION SYSTEM PARTITIONING
Control: The organization partitions the information system into components residing in separate
physical domains (or environments) as deemed necessary.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system partitioning is a part of a defense-in-depth protection
strategy. An organizational assessment of risk guides the partitioning of information system
components into separate physical domains (or environments). The security categorization also
guides the selection of appropriate candidates for domain partitioning. Managed interfaces restrict
or prohibit network access and information flow among partitioned information system
components. Related controls: AC-4, SC-7.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publication 199.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SC-32 HIGH SC-32
SC-33 TRANSMISSION PREPARATION INTEGRITY
Control: The information system protects the integrity of information during the processes of data
aggregation, packaging, and transformation in preparation for transmission.
Supplemental Guidance: Information can be subjected to unauthorized changes (e.g., malicious
and/or unintentional modification) at information aggregation or protocol transformation points.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
SC-34 NON-MODIFIABLE EXECUTABLE PROGRAMS
Control: The information system at [Assignment: organization-defined information system
components]:
a. Loads and executes the operating environment from hardware-enforced, read-only media;
and
b. Loads and executes [Assignment: organization-defined applications] from hardwareenforced,
read-only media.
Supplemental Guidance: In this control, the term operating environment is defined as the code upon
which applications are hosted, for example, a monitor, executive, operating system, or application
running directly on the hardware platform. Hardware-enforced, read-only media include, for
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-122


example, CD-R/DVD-R disk drives. Use of non-modifiable storage ensures the integrity of the
software program from the point of creation of the read-only image.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs [Assignment: organization-defined information system components]
with no writeable storage that is persistent across component restart or power on/off.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement: (i) eliminates the possibility of
malicious code insertion via persistent, writeable storage within the designated information
system component; and (ii) requires no such removable storage be employed, a requirement
that may be applied directly or as a specific restriction imposed through AC-19.
(2) The organization protects the integrity of the information on read-only media.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: This control enhancement covers protecting the integrity
of information to be placed onto read-only media and controlling the media after information
has been recorded onto the media. Protection measures may include, as deemed necessary by
the organization, a combination of prevention and detection/response. This enhancement may
be satisfied by requirements imposed by other controls such as AC-3, AC-5, CM-3, CM-5,
CM-9, MP-2, MP-4, MP-5, SA-12, SC-28, SI-3, and SI-7.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
APPENDIX F-SC PAGE F-123


FAMILY: SYSTEM AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY CLASS: OPERATIONAL
SI-1 SYSTEM AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control: The organization develops, disseminates, and reviews/updates [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]:
a. A formal, documented system and information integrity policy that addresses purpose, scope,
roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among organizational entities,
and compliance; and
b. Formal, documented procedures to facilitate the implementation of the system and
information integrity policy and associated system and information integrity controls.
Supplemental Guidance: This control is intended to produce the policy and procedures that are
required for the effective implementation of selected security controls and control enhancements
in the system and information integrity family. The policy and procedures are consistent with
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Existing organizational policies and procedures may make the need for additional
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The system and information integrity policy can be
included as part of the general information security policy for the organization. System and
information integrity procedures can be developed for the security program in general and for a
particular information system, when required. The organizational risk management strategy is a
key factor in the development of the system and information integrity policy. Related control:
PM-9.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-100.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SI-1 MOD SI-1 HIGH SI-1
SI-2 FLAW REMEDIATION
Control: The organization:
a. Identifies, reports, and corrects information system flaws;
b. Tests software updates related to flaw remediation for effectiveness and potential side effects
on organizational information systems before installation; and
c. Incorporates flaw remediation into the organizational configuration management process.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization identifies information systems containing software
affected by recently announced software flaws (and potential vulnerabilities resulting from those
flaws) and reports this information to designated organizational officials with information security
responsibilities (e.g., senior information security officers, information system security managers,
information systems security officers). The organization (including any contractor to the
organization) promptly installs security-relevant software updates (e.g., patches, service packs,
and hot fixes). Flaws discovered during security assessments, continuous monitoring, incident
response activities, or information system error handling, are also addressed expeditiously.
Organizations are encouraged to use resources such as the Common Weakness Enumeration
(CWE) or Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) databases in remediating flaws
discovered in organizational information systems. By requiring that flaw remediation be
incorporated into the organizational configuration management process, it is the intent of this
control that required/anticipated remediation actions are tracked and verified. An example of
expected flaw remediation that would be so verified is whether the procedures contained in USAPPENDIX
F-SI PAGE F-124


CERT guidance and Information Assurance Vulnerability Alerts have been accomplished.
Related controls: CA-2, CA-7, CM-3, MA-2, IR-4, RA-5, SA-11, SI-11.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization centrally manages the flaw remediation process and installs software updates
automatically.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Due to information system integrity and availability
concerns, organizations give careful consideration to the methodology used to carry out
automatic updates.
(2) The organization employs automated mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]
to determine the state of information system components with regard to flaw remediation.
(3) The organization measures the time between flaw identification and flaw remediation, comparing
with [Assignment: organization-defined benchmarks].
(4) The organization employs automated patch management tools to facilitate flaw remediation to
[Assignment: organization-defined information system components].
References: NIST Special Publication 800-40.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SI-2 MOD SI-2 (2) HIGH SI-2 (1) (2)
SI-3 MALICIOUS CODE PROTECTION
Control: The organization:
a. Employs malicious code protection mechanisms at information system entry and exit points
and at workstations, servers, or mobile computing devices on the network to detect and
eradicate malicious code:
- Transported by electronic mail, electronic mail attachments, web accesses, removable
media, or other common means; or
- Inserted through the exploitation of information system vulnerabilities;
b. Updates malicious code protection mechanisms (including signature definitions) whenever
new releases are available in accordance with organizational configuration management
policy and procedures;
c. Configures malicious code protection mechanisms to:
- Perform periodic scans of the information system [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] and real-time scans of files from external sources as the files are downloaded,
opened, or executed in accordance with organizational security policy; and
- [Selection (one or more): block malicious code; quarantine malicious code; send alert to
administrator; [Assignment: organization-defined action]] in response to malicious code
detection; and
d. Addresses the receipt of false positives during malicious code detection and eradication and
the resulting potential impact on the availability of the information system.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system entry and exit points include, for example, firewalls,
electronic mail servers, web servers, proxy servers, and remote-access servers. Malicious code
includes, for example, viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and spyware. Malicious code can also be
encoded in various formats (e.g., UUENCODE, Unicode) or contained within a compressed file.
Removable media includes, for example, USB devices, diskettes, or compact disks. A variety of
technologies and methods exist to limit or eliminate the effects of malicious code attacks.
Pervasive configuration management and strong software integrity controls may be effective in
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-125


preventing execution of unauthorized code. In addition to commercial off-the-shelf software,
malicious code may also be present in custom-built software. This could include, for example,
logic bombs, back doors, and other types of cyber attacks that could affect organizational missions
and business functions. Traditional malicious code protection mechanisms are not built to detect
such code. In these situations, organizations must rely instead on other risk mitigation measures to
include, for example, secure coding practices, trusted procurement processes, configuration
management and control, and monitoring practices to help ensure that software does not perform
functions other than those intended. Related controls: SA-4, SA-8, SA-12, SA-13, SI-4, SI-7.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization centrally manages malicious code protection mechanisms.
(2) The information system automatically updates malicious code protection mechanisms (including
signature definitions).
(3) The information system prevents non-privileged users from circumventing malicious code
protection capabilities.
(4) The information system updates malicious code protection mechanisms only when directed by a
privileged user.
(5) The organization does not allow users to introduce removable media into the information system.
(6) The organization tests malicious code protection mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] by introducing a known benign, non-spreading test case into the information system
and subsequently verifying that both detection of the test case and associated incident reporting
occur, as required.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-83.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SI-3 MOD SI-3 (1) (2) (3) HIGH SI-3 (1) (2) (3)
SI-4 INFORMATION SYSTEM MONITORING
Control: The organization:
a. Monitors events on the information system in accordance with [Assignment: organizationdefined
monitoring objectives] and detects information system attacks;
b. Identifies unauthorized use of the information system;
c. Deploys monitoring devices: (i) strategically within the information system to collect
organization-determined essential information; and (ii) at ad hoc locations within the system
to track specific types of transactions of interest to the organization;
d. Heightens the level of information system monitoring activity whenever there is an indication
of increased risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or
the Nation based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, or other credible
sources of information; and
e. Obtains legal opinion with regard to information system monitoring activities in accordance
with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, or regulations.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system monitoring includes external and internal monitoring.
External monitoring includes the observation of events occurring at the system boundary (i.e., part
of perimeter defense and boundary protection). Internal monitoring includes the observation of
events occurring within the system (e.g., within internal organizational networks and system
components). Information system monitoring capability is achieved through a variety of tools and
techniques (e.g., intrusion detection systems, intrusion prevention systems, malicious code
protection software, audit record monitoring software, network monitoring software). Strategic
locations for monitoring devices include, for example, at selected perimeter locations and near
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-126


server farms supporting critical applications, with such devices typically being employed at the
managed interfaces associated with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The Einstein network monitoring
device from the Department of Homeland Security is an example of a system monitoring device.
The granularity of the information collected is determined by the organization based on its
monitoring objectives and the capability of the information system to support such activities. An
example of a specific type of transaction of interest to the organization with regard to monitoring
is Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses organizational HTTP proxies, when
use of such proxies is required. Related controls: AC-4, AC-8, AC-17, AU-2, AU-6, SI-3, SI-7.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization interconnects and configures individual intrusion detection tools into a
systemwide intrusion detection system using common protocols.
(2) The organization employs automated tools to support near real-time analysis of events.
(3) The organization employs automated tools to integrate intrusion detection tools into access
control and flow control mechanisms for rapid response to attacks by enabling reconfiguration of
these mechanisms in support of attack isolation and elimination.
(4) The information system monitors inbound and outbound communications for unusual or
unauthorized activities or conditions.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Unusual/unauthorized activities or conditions include, for
example, internal traffic that indicates the presence of malicious code within an information
system or propagating among system components, the unauthorized export of information, or
signaling to an external information system. Evidence of malicious code is used to identify
potentially compromised information systems or information system components.
(5) The information system provides near real-time alerts when the following indications of
compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment: organization-defined list of compromise
indicators].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Alerts may be generated, depending on the organizationdefined
list of indicators, from a variety of sources, for example, audit records or input from
malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention mechanisms, or
boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers.
(6) The information system prevents non-privileged users from circumventing intrusion detection and
prevention capabilities.
(7) The information system notifies [Assignment: organization-defined list of incident response
personnel (identified by name and/or by role)] of suspicious events and takes [Assignment:
organization-defined list of least-disruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The least-disruptive actions may include initiating a
request for human response.
(8) The organization protects information obtained from intrusion-monitoring tools from unauthorized
access, modification, and deletion.
(9) The organization tests/exercises intrusion-monitoring tools [Assignment: organization-defined
time-period].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The frequency of testing/exercises is dependent upon the
type and method of deployment of the intrusion-monitoring tools.
(10) The organization makes provisions so that encrypted traffic is visible to information system
monitoring tools.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: The enhancement recognizes the need to balance
encrypting traffic versus the need to have insight into that traffic from a monitoring
perspective. For some organizations, the need to ensure the confidentiality of traffic is
paramount; for others, the mission-assurance concerns are greater.
(11) The organization analyzes outbound communications traffic at the external boundary of the system
(i.e., system perimeter) and, as deemed necessary, at selected interior points within the system
(e.g., subnets, subsystems) to discover anomalies.
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-127


Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Anomalies within the information system include, for
example, large file transfers, long-time persistent connections, unusual protocols and ports in
use, and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
(12) The organization employs automated mechanisms to alert security personnel of the following
inappropriate or unusual activities with security implications: [Assignment: organization-defined
list of inappropriate or unusual activities that trigger alerts].
(13) The organization:
(a) Analyzes communications traffic/event patterns for the information system;
(b) Develops profiles representing common traffic patterns and/or events; and
(c) Uses the traffic/event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices to reduce the number of
false positives to [Assignment: organization-defined measure of false positives] and the
number of false negatives to [Assignment: organization-defined measure of false negatives].
(14) The organization employs a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices
and to detect attack attempts and potential compromises/breaches to the information system.
(15) The organization employs an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications
traffic as the traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
(16) The organization correlates information from monitoring tools employed throughout the
information system to achieve organization-wide situational awareness.
(17) The organization correlates results from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated situational awareness.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Integrated situational awareness enhances the capability
of the organization to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the methods
and techniques employed to carry out the attacks.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-61, 800-83, 800-92, 800-94.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SI-4 (2) (4) (5) (6) HIGH SI-4 (2) (4) (5) (6)
SI-5 SECURITY ALERTS, ADVISORIES, AND DIRECTIVES
Control: The organization:
a. Receives information system security alerts, advisories, and directives from designated
external organizations on an ongoing basis;
b. Generates internal security alerts, advisories, and directives as deemed necessary;
c. Disseminates security alerts, advisories, and directives to [Assignment: organization-defined
list of personnel (identified by name and/or by role)]; and
d. Implements security directives in accordance with established time frames, or notifies the
issuing organization of the degree of noncompliance.
Supplemental Guidance: Security alerts and advisories are generated by the United States Computer
Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) to maintain situational awareness across the federal
government. Security directives are issued by OMB or other designated organizations with the
responsibility and authority to issue such directives. Compliance to security directives is essential
due to the critical nature of many of these directives and the potential immediate adverse affects
on organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation should the
directives not be implemented in a timely manner.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization employs automated mechanisms to make security alert and advisory information
available throughout the organization as needed.
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-128


References: NIST Special Publication 800-40.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW SI-5 MOD SI-5 HIGH SI-5 (1)
SI-6 SECURITY FUNCTIONALITY VERIFICATION
Control: The information system verifies the correct operation of security functions [Selection (one
or more): [Assignment: organization-defined system transitional states]; upon command by user
with appropriate privilege; periodically every [Assignment: organization-defined time-period]]
and [Selection (one or more): notifies system administrator; shuts the system down; restarts the
system; [Assignment: organization-defined alternative action(s)]] when anomalies are discovered.
Supplemental Guidance: The need to verify security functionality applies to all security functions.
For those security functions that are not able to execute automated self-tests, the organization
either implements compensating security controls or explicitly accepts the risk of not performing
the verification as required. Information system transitional states include, for example, startup,
restart, shutdown, and abort.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The information system provides notification of failed automated security tests.
(2) The information system provides automated support for the management of distributed security
testing.
(3) The organization reports the result of security function verification to designated organizational
officials with information security responsibilities.
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Organizational officials with information security
responsibilities include, for example, senior information security officers, information system
security managers, and information systems security officers.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH SI-6
SI-7 SOFTWARE AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY
Control: The information system detects unauthorized changes to software and information.
Supplemental Guidance: The organization employs integrity verification applications on the
information system to look for evidence of information tampering, errors, and omissions. The
organization employs good software engineering practices with regard to commercial off-the-shelf
integrity mechanisms (e.g., parity checks, cyclical redundancy checks, cryptographic hashes) and
uses tools to automatically monitor the integrity of the information system and the applications it
hosts.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization reassesses the integrity of software and information by performing [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] integrity scans of the information system.
(2) The organization employs automated tools that provide notification to designated individuals upon
discovering discrepancies during integrity verification.
(3) The organization employs centrally managed integrity verification tools.
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-129


(4) The organization requires use of tamper-evident packaging for [Assignment: organization-defined
information system components] during [Selection: transportation from vendor to operational site;
during operation; both].
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SI-7 (1) HIGH SI-7 (1) (2)
SI-8 SPAM PROTECTION
Control: The organization:
a. Employs spam protection mechanisms at information system entry and exit points and at
workstations, servers, or mobile computing devices on the network to detect and take action
on unsolicited messages transported by electronic mail, electronic mail attachments, web
accesses, or other common means; and
b. Updates spam protection mechanisms (including signature definitions) when new releases are
available in accordance with organizational configuration management policy and procedures.
Supplemental Guidance: Information system entry and exit points include, for example, firewalls,
electronic mail servers, web servers, proxy servers, and remote-access servers. Related controls:
SC-5, SI-3.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization centrally manages spam protection mechanisms.
(2) The information system automatically updates spam protection mechanisms (including signature
definitions).
References: NIST Special Publication 800-45.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SI-8 HIGH SI-8 (1)
SI-9 INFORMATION INPUT RESTRICTIONS
Control: The organization restricts the capability to input information to the information system to
authorized personnel.
Supplemental Guidance: Restrictions on organizational personnel authorized to input information to
the information system may extend beyond the typical access controls employed by the system
and include limitations based on specific operational/project responsibilities. Related controls:
AC-5, AC-6.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD SI-9 HIGH SI-9
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-130


SI-10 INFORMATION INPUT VALIDATION
Control: The information system checks the validity of information inputs.
Supplemental Guidance: Rules for checking the valid syntax and semantics of information system
inputs (e.g., character set, length, numerical range, acceptable values) are in place to verify that
inputs match specified definitions for format and content. Inputs passed to interpreters are
prescreened to prevent the content from being unintentionally interpreted as commands.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P1 LOW Not Selected MOD SI-10 HIGH SI-10
SI-11 ERROR HANDLING
Control: The information system:
a. Identifies potentially security-relevant error conditions;
b. Generates error messages that provide information necessary for corrective actions without
revealing [Assignment: organization-defined sensitive or potentially harmful information] in
error logs and administrative messages that could be exploited by adversaries; and
c. Reveals error messages only to authorized personnel.
Supplemental Guidance: The structure and content of error messages are carefully considered by the
organization. The extent to which the information system is able to identify and handle error
conditions is guided by organizational policy and operational requirements. Sensitive information
includes, for example, account numbers, social security numbers, and credit card numbers.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW Not Selected MOD SI-11 HIGH SI-11
SI-12 INFORMATION OUTPUT HANDLING AND RETENTION
Control: The organization handles and retains both information within and output from the
information system in accordance with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives,
policies, regulations, standards, and operational requirements.
Supplemental Guidance: The output handling and retention requirements cover the full life cycle of
the information, in some cases extending beyond the disposal of the information system. The
National Archives and Records Administration provides guidance on records retention. Related
controls: MP-2, MP-4.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P2 LOW SI-12 MOD SI-12 HIGH SI-12
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-131


SI-13 PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION
Control: The organization:
a. Protects the information system from harm by considering mean time to failure for
[Assignment: organization-defined list of information system components] in specific
environments of operation; and
b. Provides substitute information system components, when needed, and a mechanism to
exchange active and standby roles of the components.
Supplemental Guidance: While mean time to failure is primarily a reliability issue, this control
focuses on the potential failure of specific components of the information system that provide
security capability. Mean time to failure rates are defendable and based on considerations that are
installation-specific, not industry-average. The transfer of responsibilities between active and
standby information system components does not compromise safety, operational readiness, or
security (e.g., state variables are preserved). The standby component is available at all times
except where a failure recovery is in progress or for maintenance reasons. Related control: CP-2.
Control Enhancements:
(1) The organization takes the information system component out of service by transferring
component responsibilities to a substitute component no later than [Assignment: organizationdefined
fraction or percentage] of mean time to failure.
(2) The organization does not allow a process to execute without supervision for more than
[Assignment: organization-defined time period].
(3) The organization manually initiates a transfer between active and standby information system
components at least once per [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] if the mean time to
failure exceeds [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
(4) The organization, if an information system component failure is detected:
(a) Ensures that the standby information system component successfully and transparently
assumes its role within [Assignment: organization-defined time period]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): activates [Assignment: organization-defined alarm]; automatically
shuts down the information system].
Enhancement Supplemental Guidance: Automatic or manual transfer of roles to a standby unit
may occur upon detection of a component failure.
References: None.
Priority and Baseline Allocation:
P0 LOW Not Selected MOD Not Selected HIGH Not Selected
APPENDIX F-SI PAGE F-132


APPENDIX G
INFORMATION SECURITY PROGRAMS
ORGANIZATION-WIDE INFORMATION SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT CONTROLS
The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) requires organizations to
develop and implement an organization-wide information security program to address
information security for the information and information systems that support the
operations and assets of the organization, including those provided or managed by another
organization, contractor, or other source. The information security program management (PM)
controls described in this appendix complement the security controls in Appendix F and focus on
the organization-wide information security requirements that are independent of any particular
information system and are essential for managing information security programs. Organizations
specify the individuals within the organization responsible for the development, implementation,
assessment, authorization, and monitoring of the information security program management
controls. Organizations document program management controls in the information security
program plan. The organization-wide information security program plan supplements the
individual security plans developed for each organizational information system. Together, the
security plans for the individual information systems and the information security program cover
the totality of security controls employed by the organization.
In addition to documenting the information security program management controls, the security
program plan provides a vehicle for the organization, in a central repository, to document all
security controls from Appendix F that have been designated as common controls (i.e., security
controls inherited by organizational information systems). The information security program
management controls and common controls contained in the information security program plan
are implemented, assessed for effectiveness,74 and authorized by a senior organizational official,
with the same or similar authority and responsibility for managing risk as the authorization
officials for information systems.75 Plans of action and milestones are developed and maintained
for the program management and common controls that are deemed through assessment to be less
than effective. Information security program management and common controls are also subject
to the same continuous monitoring requirements as security controls employed in individual
organizational information systems.
Cautionary Note
Organizations are required to implement security program management controls to provide a foundation
for the organization’s information security program. The successful implementation of security controls
for organizational information systems depends on the successful implementation of the organization’s
program management controls.
74 Assessment procedures for program management controls and common controls can be found in NIST Special
Publication 800-53A.
75 In situations where common controls are inherited from external environments, organizations should consult the
guidance provided in Section 3.4.
APPENDIX G PAGE G-1

FAMILY: INFORMATION SECURITY PLAN CLASS: MANAGEMENT
PM-1 INFORMATION SECURITY PROGRAM PLAN
Control: The organization:
a. Develops and disseminates an organization-wide information security program plan that:
- Provides an overview of the requirements for the security program and a description of the
security program management controls and common controls in place or planned for
meeting those requirements;
- Provides sufficient information about the program management controls and common
controls (including specification of parameters for any assignment and selection operations
either explicitly or by reference) to enable an implementation that is unambiguously
compliant with the intent of the plan and a determination of the risk to be incurred if the
plan is implemented as intended;
- Includes roles, responsibilities, management commitment, coordination among
organizational entities, and compliance;
- Is approved by a senior official with responsibility and accountability for the risk being
incurred to organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, and reputation),
organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation;
b. Reviews the organization-wide information security program plan [Assignment: organizationdefined
frequency]; and
c. Revises the plan to address organizational changes and problems identified during plan
implementation or security control assessments.
Supplemental Guidance: The information security program plan can be represented in a single
document or compilation of documents at the discretion of the organization. The plan documents
the organization-wide program management controls and organization-defined common controls.
The security plans for individual information systems and the organization-wide information
security program plan together, provide complete coverage for all security controls employed
within the organization. Common controls are documented in an appendix to the organization’s
information security program plan unless the controls are included in a separate security plan for
an information system (e.g., security controls employed as part of an intrusion detection system
providing organization-wide boundary protection inherited by one or more organizational
information systems). The organization-wide information security program plan will indicate
which separate security plans contain descriptions of common controls.
Organizations have the flexibility to describe common controls in a single document or in multiple
documents. In the case of multiple documents, the documents describing common controls are
included as attachments to the information security program plan. If the information security
program plan contains multiple documents, the organization specifies in each document the
organizational official or officials responsible for the development, implementation, assessment,
authorization, and monitoring of the respective common controls. For example, the organization
may require that the Facilities Management Office develop, implement, assess, authorize, and
continuously monitor common physical and environmental protection controls from the PE family
when such controls are not associated with a particular information system but instead, support
multiple information systems. Related control: PM-8.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
PM-2 SENIOR INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER
Control: The organization appoints a senior information security officer with the mission and
resources to coordinate, develop, implement, and maintain an organization-wide information
security program.
APPENDIX G PAGE G-2


Supplemental Guidance: The security officer described in this control is an organizational official.
For a federal agency (as defined in applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies,
or regulations) this official is the Senior Agency Information Security Officer. Organizations may
also refer to this organizational official as the Senior Information Security Officer or Chief
Information Security Officer.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
PM-3 INFORMATION SECURITY RESOURCES
Control: The organization:
a. Ensures that all capital planning and investment requests include the resources needed to
implement the information security program and documents all exceptions to this
requirement;
b. Employs a business case/Exhibit 300/Exhibit 53 to record the resources required; and
c. Ensures that information security resources are available for expenditure as planned.
Supplemental Guidance: Organizations may designate and empower an Investment Review Board
(or similar group) to manage and provide oversight for the information security-related aspects of
the capital planning and investment control process. Related controls: PM-4, SA-2.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-65.
PM-4 PLAN OF ACTION AND MILESTONES PROCESS
Control: The organization implements a process for ensuring that plans of action and milestones for
the security program and the associated organizational information systems are maintained and
document the remedial information security actions to mitigate risk to organizational operations
and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation.
Supplemental Guidance: The plan of action and milestones is a key document in the information
security program and is subject to federal reporting requirements established by OMB. The plan
of action and milestones updates are based on the findings from security control assessments,
security impact analyses, and continuous monitoring activities. OMB FISMA reporting guidance
contains instructions regarding organizational plans of action and milestones. Related control:
CA-5.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: OMB Memorandum 02-01; NIST Special Publication 800-37.
PM-5 INFORMATION SYSTEM INVENTORY
Control: The organization develops and maintains an inventory of its information systems.
Supplemental Guidance: This control addresses the inventory requirements in FISMA. OMB
provides guidance on developing information systems inventories and associated reporting
requirements.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: None.
APPENDIX G PAGE G-3


PM-6 INFORMATION SECURITY MEASURES OF PERFORMANCE
Control: The organization develops, monitors, and reports on the results of information security
measures of performance.
Supplemental Guidance: Measures of performance are outcome-based metrics used by an
organization to measure the effectiveness or efficiency of the information security program and
the security controls employed in support of the program.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-55.
PM-7 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
Control: The organization develops an enterprise architecture with consideration for information
security and the resulting risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other
organizations, and the Nation.
Supplemental Guidance: The enterprise architecture developed by the organization is aligned with
the Federal Enterprise Architecture. The integration of information security requirements and
associated security controls into the organization’s enterprise architecture helps to ensure that
security considerations are addressed by organizations early in the system development life cycle
and are directly and explicitly related to the organization’s mission/business processes. This also
embeds into the enterprise architecture, an integral security architecture consistent with
organizational risk management and information security strategies. Security requirements and
control integration are most effectively accomplished through the application of the Risk
Management Framework and supporting security standards and guidelines. The Federal Segment
Architecture Methodology provides guidance on integrating information security requirements and
security controls into enterprise architectures. Related controls: PL-2, PM-11, RA-2.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publication 800-39; Web: WWW.FSAM.GOV.
PM-8 CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
Control: The organization addresses information security issues in the development,
documentation, and updating of a critical infrastructure and key resources protection plan.
Supplemental Guidance: The requirement and guidance for defining critical infrastructure and key
resources and for preparing an associated critical infrastructure protection plan are found in
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and
guidance. Related controls: PM-1, PM-9, PM-11, RA-3.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: HSPD 7.
PM-9 RISK MANAGEMENT STRATEGY
Control: The organization:
a. Develops a comprehensive strategy to manage risk to organizational operations and assets,
individuals, other organizations, and the Nation associated with the operation and use of
information systems; and
b. Implements that strategy consistently across the organization.
Supplemental Guidance: An organization-wide risk management strategy includes, for example, an
unambiguous expression of the risk tolerance for the organization, acceptable risk assessment
APPENDIX G PAGE G-4


methodologies, risk mitigation strategies, a process for consistently evaluating risk across the
organization with respect to the organization’s risk tolerance, and approaches for monitoring risk
over time. The use of a risk executive function can facilitate consistent, organization-wide
application of the risk management strategy. The organization-wide risk management strategy can
be informed by risk-related inputs from other sources both internal and external to the organization
to ensure the strategy is both broad-based and comprehensive. Related control: RA-3.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-30, 800-39.
PM-10 SECURITY AUTHORIZATION PROCESS
Control: The organization:
a. Manages (i.e., documents, tracks, and reports) the security state of organizational information
systems through security authorization processes;
b. Designates individuals to fulfill specific roles and responsibilities within the organizational
risk management process; and
c. Fully integrates the security authorization processes into an organization-wide risk
management program.
Supplemental Guidance: The security authorization process for information systems requires the
implementation of the Risk Management Framework and the employment of associated security
standards and guidelines. Specific roles within the risk management process include a designated
authorizing official for each organizational information system. Related control: CA-6.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: NIST Special Publications 800-37, 800-39.
PM-11 MISSION/BUSINESS PROCESS DEFINITION
Control: The organization:
a. Defines mission/business processes with consideration for information security and the
resulting risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other
organizations, and the Nation; and
b. Determines information protection needs arising from the defined mission/business processes
and revises the processes as necessary, until an achievable set of protection needs is obtained.
Supplemental Guidance: Information protection needs are technology-independent, required
capabilities to counter threats to organizations, individuals, or the Nation through the compromise
of information (i.e., loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability). Information protection needs
are derived from the mission/business needs defined by the organization, the mission/business
processes selected to meet the stated needs, and the organizational risk management strategy.
Information protection needs determine the required security controls for the organization and the
associated information systems supporting the mission/business processes. Inherent in defining an
organization’s information protection needs is an understanding of the level of adverse impact that
could result if a compromise of information occurs. The security categorization process is used to
make such potential impact determinations. Mission/business process definitions and associated
information protection requirements are documented by the organization in accordance with
organizational policy and procedure. Related controls: PM-7, PM-8, RA-2.
Control Enhancements: None.
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800-60.
